The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Luck of the Mounted, by Ralph S. Kendall


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Luck of the Mounted
       A Tale of the Royal Northwest Mounted Police


Author: Ralph S. Kendall

Release Date: May 30, 2005  [eBook #15940]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LUCK OF THE MOUNTED***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



THE LUCK OF THE MOUNTED

A Tale of the Royal Northwest Mounted Police

by

SERGEANT RALPH S. KENDALL

Ex-Member of the R.N.W.M.P.

Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers          New York

1920







  This truest of stories confirms beyond doubt,
  That truest of adages--"Murder will out!"
  In vain may the blood-spiller "double" and fly,
  In vain even witchcraft and sorcery try:
  Although for a time he may 'scape, by-and-by
  He'll be sure to be caught by a Hue and a Cry!
                                        --THE INGOLDSBY LEGEND




TO

MY OLD COMRADES


PRESENT, AND EX-MEMBERS OF THE

R.N.W.M. POLICE


THIS WORK IS DEDICATED WITH EVERY KIND THOUGHT






CHAPTER I

  _O sing us a song of days that are gone--
  Of men and happenings--of war and peace;
  We love to yarn of "th' times that was"
  As our hair grows gray, and our years increase.
  So--revert we again to our ancient lays--
  Fill we our pipes, and our glasses raise--
  "Salue! to those stirring, bygone days!"
  Cry the old non-coms of the Mounted Police._
                                        MEMORIES


All day long the blizzard had raged, in one continuous squalling moaning
roar--the fine-spun snow swirling and drifting about the
barrack-buildings and grounds of the old Mounted Police Post of L.
Division.  Whirraru!-ee!--thrumm-mm! hummed the biting nor'easter through
the cross-tree rigging of the towering flag-pole in the centre of the
wind-swept square, while the slapping flag-halyards kept up an infernal
"devil's tattoo."  With snow-bound roof from which hung huge icicles,
like walrus-tusks, the big main building loomed up, ghostly and
indistinct, amidst the whirling, white-wreathed world, save where, from
the lighted windows broad streamers of radiance stabbed the surrounding
gloom; reflecting the driving snow-spume like dust-motes dancing in a
sunbeam.

Enveloped in snow-drifts and barely visible in the uncertain light there
clustered about the central structure the long, low-lying guard-room,
stables, quartermaster's store, and several smaller adjacent buildings
comprising "The Barracks."  It was a bitter February night in South
Alberta.

From the vicinity of the guard-room the muffled-up figure of a man, with
head down against the driving blizzard, padded noiselessly with
moccasined feet up the pathway leading to the main building.  Soon
reaching his destination, he dived hastily through the double storm-doors
of the middle entrance into the passage, and banged them to.

Flanking him on either side, in welcome contrast to the bitter world
outside, he beheld the all-familiar sight of two inviting portals, each
radiating light, warmth, and good fellowship--the one on his right hand
particularly.  A moment he halted irresolutely between regimental canteen
and library; then, for some reason best known to himself, he steadily
ignored both, for the time being, and passing on began slowly to mount a
short flight of stairs at the end of the passage.

Sweet music beguiled each reluctant step of his ascent: the tinkle of a
piano accompaniment to a roaring jovial chorus from the canteen assuring
him with plaintive, but futile insistence just then, that--

  _Beer, beer! was glorious beer, etc_.

Reaching the landing he paused for a space in an intent listening
attitude outside the closed door of a room marked No. 3.  From within
came the sounds of men's voices raised in a high-pitched, gabbling
altercation.

Turning swiftly to an imaginary audience, his expressive young
countenance contorted into a grimace of unholy glee, the listener flung
aloft his arms and blithely executed a few noiseless steps of an
impromptu war-dance.

"They're at it again!" he muttered ecstatically.

Some seconds he capered thus in pantomime; then, as swiftly composing his
features into a mask-like expression, he turned the handle and entered.
On the big thermometer nailed outside the Orderly-room the mercury may
have registered anything between twenty and thirty below zero, but inside
Barrack-room No. 3 the temperature at that moment was warm enough.

Two men, seated at either end Of a long table in the centre of the room,
busily engaged in cleaning their accoutrements, glanced up casually at
his entrance; then, each vouchsafing him a preoccupied salutory mumble,
they bent to their furbishing with the brisk concentration peculiar to
"Service men" the world over.  As an accompaniment to their labours, in
desultory fashion, they kept alive the embers of a facetious wrangling
argument--their respective vocabularies, albeit more or less ensanguined,
exhibiting a fluent and masterly range of quaint barrack-room idiom and
invective.

Both were clad in brown duck "fatigue slacks," the rolled-up sleeves of
their "gray-back" shirts disclosing the fact that the sinewy forearms of
both men were decorated with gay and fanciful specimens of the tattoo
artist's genius.  A third man, similarly habited, lay stretched out,
apparently sleeping on one of the cots that were arranged around the
room.  Opening his eyes he greeted the newcomer with a lethargic "'Lo,
Redmond!"; then, turning over on his side, he relapsed once more into the
arms of Morpheus--his nasal organ proclaiming that fact beyond doubt.

The orderly aspect of the room bore mute evidence of regimental
discipline.  The blankets--with the sheets placed in the centre--were
strapped into a neat roll at the head of each tartan-rugged cot, at the
foot of which lay a folded black oil-sheet.  Above, on a small shelf,
were the spare uniform and Stetson hat, flanked on either side by a pair
of high brown "Strathcona" riding-boots, with straight-shanked
"cavalry-jack" spurs attached.  On pegs underneath hung the regulation
side-arms,--a "Sam Browne" belt and holster containing the Colt's .45
Service revolver.  A rifle-rack at the end of the room contained its
quota of Winchester carbines.

The last arrival, whom the sleeper had designated "Redmond," proceeded to
divest himself of his short fur coat and, after dashing the snow from it
and his muskrat-faced cap, unbuckled his side-arms, and hung all up at
the head of his own particular cot.

Flashing across our retrospective mind-screens, as at times we dreamily
delve into the past, beloved faces come and go.  Forever in the memory of
the writer, as his ideal conception of healthy, virile splendid Youth
personified, will stand the bronzed, debonair, clean-shaven young face of
George Redmond--or "Reddy," as he was more familiarly dubbed by his
comrades of L. Division.

Handsome his countenance could not have been termed--the features were
too strongly-marked and roughly-hewn.  But it was an undeniably open,
attractive and honest one--the sort of face that instinctively invited
one's "Hail, fellow, well met!" trust at first sight.  His hair was dark
auburn in colour, short and wavy, with a sort of golden tinge in it; his
forehead was broad and open, and below it were two uncommonly waggish
blue eyes.  His habitual expression was a mixture of nonchalant good
humour and gay insouciance, but the slightly aquiline, prominent nose and
the set of the square aggressive jaw belied in a measure the humourous
curl of the lips.

Those who knew his disposition well were fully aware how swiftly the
mocking smile could vanish from that indolent young face on occasion--how
unpleasantly those wide blue orbs could contract beneath scowling brows
into mere pin-points of steel and ice.  Slightly above middle height,
well-set-up and strongly, though not heavily made, the lines of his
clean-built figure suggested the embodiment of grace, strength and
activity.

He was dressed in the regulation winter uniform of the Force, consisting
of a scarlet-serge tunic, dark-blue cord riding breeches with the broad
yellow stripe down the side, thick black woollen stockings reaching to
the knee, and buckskin moccasins with spurs attached.  Over the
stockings, and rolled tightly down upon the tops of the moccasins as
snow-excluders, were a pair of heavy gray socks.

Wriggling out of his tightly-fitting red serge he carelessly flung that
article onto the next cot; then, filling and lighting a pipe, he
stretched out comfortably upon his own.  With hands clasped behind his
head he lazily watched the two previously-mentioned men at their cleaning
operations, his expressive face registering indolent but mischievous
interest, as he listened to their wrangling.

"No!" resumed one of the twain emphatically, apropos of some previous
contention, "No, by gum! this division ain't what it used to be in them
days."

He gave vent to a reminiscent sigh as he spat upon and rubbed up some
powdered brick-dust.

"Billy Herchmer was O.C., Fred Bagley was Sergeant-Major--and there was
Harry Hetherington, Ralph Bell, De Barre, Jeb Browne, Pennycuik, and all
them old-timers.  Eyah! th' times that was! th' times that was!  Force's
all filled up now mostly with 'Smart Aleck' kids, like Reddy, here,
an'"--he shot a glance of calculating invitation at his vis-a-vis,
Hardy--"'old sweats' from the Old Country Imperials."

Artfully to start some trivial but decidedly inflammable barrack-room
argument was one of Corporal Dave McCullough's pet diversions.  At this
somewhat doubtful pastime he would exhibit a knowledge of human nature
and an infinite patience worthy of a better object.  From some occult
reasoning of his Celtic soul the psychological moment he generally chose
as being likely the most fruitful of results was either a few minutes
before, or after "Lights Out."

When the ensuing conflagration had blazed to the desired stage he would
quietly extinguish his own vocal torch and lie back on his cot with a
sort of "Mark Antony" "Now let it work!" chuckle.  "Getting their goats"
he termed it.  Usually though, when the storm of bad language and boots
had subsided, his dupes, too, like those of "Silver Street" were wont to
scratch their heads and commune one with another:--

  --_begod, I wonder why_?

He was a heavy-shouldered man; middle-aged, with thick, crisp iron-gray
hair and moustache and a pair of humourous brown eyes twinkling in a
lined, weather-beaten face.  His slightly nasal voice was dry and
penetrating to the point of exasperation.  For many years he had acted as
"farrier" to L. Division.

George warily accepted the share of the pleasantry extended to him with a
shrug, and a non-committal grin.  But Hardy chose to regard it as a
distinct challenge, and therefore a promising bone of contention.  He
gloated over it awhile ere pouncing.

A medium-sized, wiry, compactly-built man bodily, Hardy bore lightly the
weight of his forty-five years.  His hair was of that uncertain sandy
colour which somehow never seems to turn gray; the edges of the
crisply-curling forelock being soaped, rolled and brushed up into that
approved tonsorial ornament known in barrack-room parlance as a "quiff."
His complexion was of that peculiar olive-brown shade especially
noticeable in most Anglo-Indians.  In his smart, soldierly aspect,
biting, jerky Cockney speech and clipped, wax-pointed moustache he
betrayed unmistakably the ex-Imperial cavalry-man.

"Old sweats!" he echoed sarcastically--he pronounced it "aoweld"--"Yas!
you go tell that t' th' Marines, me lad! . . .  Took a few o' th' sime
'old sweats' t' knock ''Ay Leg!' 'Straw Leg' inter some o' you mossbacks
at th' stort orf.  Gee!  Har! oh, gorblimey, yas!"  He illustrated his
trenchant remarks in suggestive pantomime.

"Ah!" quoth McCullough blithely, "Yu' know th' sayin'--'Old soldier--old
stiff?' . . ."

His adversary burnished a spur viciously.  "Old pleeceman--old son of
a--" he retorted with a spiteful grin.  "W'y, my old Kissiwasti here
knows more abaht drill'n wot you do."  He indicated a rather
disreputable-looking gray parrot, preening itself in a cage which stood
upon a cot nearby.

At the all-familiar sound of its name the bird suddenly ceased its
monotonous beak and claw gymnastics for a space, becoming on the instant
alertly attentive.  There came a preliminary craning of neck and winking
of white-parchment-lidded eyes, and then, in shockingly human fashion it
proceeded to give voluble utterance to some startling samples of
barrack-room profanity.  Its shrill invective would have awakened the
dead.  The whistling, regular snores of the sleeper suddenly wound up
with a gasping gurgle; he opened his eyes and, in a strong cereal accent
gave vent to a somnolent peevish protest.

"Losh! . . . whot wi' you fellers bickerin' an' yon damn birrd currsin' I
canna sleep! . . . gie th'--"

But Hardy silenced him with a warning finger.

"Sh-sh!  McSporran!" he hissed in a loud eager whisper, "Jes' 'awk t'
im? . . . gort th' real reg'mental tatch 'as old Kissiwasti! ain't
he?"--his face shone with simple pride--"d' yer 'ken' that? sh-sh! listen
now! . . .  Yer shud 'ear 'im s'y 'Oot, mon!' . . .  'Awk t'im up an'
tellin'yer _w'y_ th' Jocks wear th' kilts."

Awhile McSporran listened, but with singular lack of enthusiasm.
Presently, swinging his legs over the side of the cot with a weary sigh,
he proceeded to fill his pipe.  He was a thick-set, grey-eyed fair man
about thirty, with a stolid, though shrewd, clean-shaven face.

"Best ye stickit tae wha' ye ca' 'English,' auld mon!" he remarked
irritably, "Baith yersel' an' yer plurry pairrut. . . .  Ou ay, I
ken!--D'ye ken John Peel?--"

And, in derision he hummed a few lines of a rather vulgar parody of that
ancient song that obtained around Barracks.

"Say, by gad, though! that bird is a fright!" ejaculated George suddenly,
"Holy Doodle! just listen to what he said then? . . .  If ever he starts
in to hand out tracts like that when the O.C.'s up here inspecting he'll
get invested with the Order of the 'Neck-Wring' for usurping _his_ pet
privilege.  You'd better let Brankley the quartermaster have him.  He was
up here the other day and heard him.  He was tickled to death--said he'd
like to buy him off you, and 'top him off'--finish his education."

"Oh, 'e did, did 'e?" growled Hardy mutinously, but with ill-concealed
interest, "Well, 'e ain't a-goin' t' 'ave 'im!"  He breathed hard upon a
buckle and polished it to his satisfaction.  "Brankley is some connosser
I will admit," he conceded grudgingly, "but Kissiwasti's got orl th'
'toppin orf wot's good fur 'im--dahn Regina--'e went through a reg'lar
course dahn there--took 'is degree, so t' speak. . . .  I uster tike an'
'ang 'is kydge hup in that little gallery in th' ridin school of a
mornin'--when Inspector Chappell, th' ridin' master wos breakin' in a
bunch o' rookies--'toppin' orf,' wot? . . ."

"Tchkk!" clucked McCullough wearily.  "What is the use of arguin' with an
old sweat like him? . . .  Hardy'll be happy enough in Hell, so long as
he can have his bloomin' old blackguard of a parrot along with him.  If
he can't there will be a pretty fuss."

"Bear up, Hardy!" comforted George.  "When you've got that 'quiff' of
yours all fussed up, and those new 'square-pushin'' dress-pants on you're
some 'hot dog.' . . .  Now, if I thought you could 'talk pretty' and
behave yourself I'd--"

The old soldier grinned diabolically.  "Sorjint?" he broke in mincingly
"c'n I fall out an' tork t' me sister?--garn, Reddy! wipe orf yer
chin! . . . though if I did 'appen t' 'ave a sister she might s'y th'
sime fing abaht me, now, as she might s'y abaht you--to a lydy-fren' o'
'er's, p'raps. . . ."

"Say what?" demanded George incautiously.

Hardy chuckled again, "'Ere comes one o' them Mounted Pleecemen, me
dear,--orl comb an' spurs,--mark time in front there. . . !"  And he
emitted an imitation of a barnyard cackle.

McCullough shot a glance at Redmond's face.  "Can th' grief" he remarked
unsympathetically, "you're fly enough usually . . . but you fairly asked
for it that time."

Hardy spat into a cuspidor with long-range accuracy.  He beamed with
cheerful malevolence awhile upon his tormentors; then, uplifting a
cracked falsetto in an unmusical wail, to the tune of "London Bridge is
Falling Down," assured them that--

  "_Old soweljers never die, never die, never die,
  Old soweljers never--_"

With infinite mockery Redmond's boyish voice struck in--

  "_Young soldiers wish they would, wish they--_"

"'Ere!" remonstrated Hardy darkly, "chack it, Reddy! . . .  You know wot
'appens t' them as starts in, a-guyin' old soweljers?--eh?--Well, I tell
yer now!--worse'n wot 'appened t' them fresh kids in th' Bible wot mocked
th' old blowke abaht 'is bald 'ead."

"_Isch ga bibble_!  I don't care!" bawled the abandoned George; "can't be
much worse than doing 'straight duty' round Barracks, here!--same thing,
day in, day out--go and look at the 'duty detail' board--Regimental
Number--Constable Redmond, 'prisoner's escort'--punching gangs of
prisoners around all day long, on little rotten jobs about Barracks--and
'night guard' catching you every third night and--"

"Oyez! oyez! oyez! you good men of this--"

"Oh, yes! you can come the funny man all right, Mac--you've got a 'staff'
job.  Straight duty don't affect you.  Why don't they shove me out on
detachment again, and give me another chance to do real police
work? . . .  I tell you I'm fed up--properly. . . .  I wish I was out of
the blooming Force--I'm not 'wedded' to it, like you."

"'Ear, 'ear!" chimed in Hardy, with a sort of miserable heartiness.
McSporran's contribution was merely a dour Scotch grin.  In the moment's
silence that followed a tremendous bawling squall of wind rocked the
building to its very foundations.  The back-draught of it sucked open the
door, and, borne upon its wings, the roaring, full-chorused burst of a
popular barrack-room chantey floated up the stairs from the canteen
below--

  "_Old King Cole was a merry old soul,
  And a merry old soul was he--
  He called for his pipe, and he called for his glass,
  And he called for his old M.P._"

Outside the blizzard still moaned and howled; every now and then, between
lulls, screeching gusts of sleet beat upon the windows.  The parrot,
clinging upside down to the roof of its cage, winked rapidly with
Sphinx-like eyes and inclined its head sideways in an intent listening
attitude.

"Eyah! but th' Force's a bloomin' good home to some of you, all th'
same," growled McCullough.  "Listen to that 'norther'? . . .  How'd you
like to be chucked out into th' cold, cold world right now?--You, Hardy!
that's never done nothin' but 'soldier' all your life--you, Reddy! with
your 'collidge edukashun'?"

George, unmoved, listened respectfully awhile, lying on his stomach with
his chin cupped in his hands.  "Must have been a great bunch of fellows
when you first took on the Force, Dave?" he queried presently.

From sheer force of habit the old policeman glanced at his interlocutor
suspiciously.  But that young gentleman's face appearing open and serene,
merely expressing naive interest, he grunted an affirmative "Uh-huh!" and
backed his conviction with a cheerful oath.

"Ah, they sure was.  But where are they all now?" he rambled on in
garrulous reminiscence, "some of 'em rich--some of 'em broke--an' many of
'em back on th' old Force again, an' glad to get their rations.  There
was some that talked like you, Mister Bloomin' Reddy!--fed up, an' goin'
to quit--an' did quit--for a time.  There was Corky Jones, I mind.  Him
that used to blow 'bout th' wonderful jobs he'd got th' pick of when he
was 'time-ex.'  All he got was 'reeve' of some little shi-poke burg down
south.  Hooshomin its real name, but they mostly call it Hootch
thereabouts.  A rotten little dump of 'bout fifty inhabitants.  They're
drunk half th' time an' wear each other's clothes.  Ugh! filthy
beggars! . . .  He's back on th' Force again.  There was Gadgett Malone.
Proper dog he was--used to sing 'Love me, an' th' World is Mine.'  He got
all balled up with a widder, first crack out o' th' box, an' she shook
him down for his roll an' put th' skids under him in great shape inside
of a month.  He's back on th' Force again.  There was Barton McGuckin.
When he pulled out he shook hands all around, I mind.  Yes, sir! with
tears in his eyes he did.  Told us no matter how high he rose in th'
world he'd never forget his old comrades--always rec'gnize 'em on th'
street an' all that.  On his way down town he was fool enough to go into
one o' these here Romany Pikey dives for to get his fortune told.  This
gypsy woman threw it into him he was goin' to make his fortune in th'
next two or three days by investin' his dough in a certain brand of oil
shares. . . ."

McCullough paused and filled his pipe with elaborate care, "Th' last time
I see him he was in th' buildin' an' contractin' line--carryin' a hod an'
pushin' an Irishman's buggy . . .  There's--but, aw hell! what's th' use
o' talkin'?" he concluded disgustedly.  "No!  times ain't what they was,
by gum!--rough stuff an' all things was run more real reg'mental them
days--not half th' grousin' either."

"Reel reg'mental?" echoed Hardy mincingly, "aowe gorblimey! 'awk t'im?
well, wot abaht it?  I've done my bit, too!--in Injia.  See 'ere; look!"

He pulled up the loose duck-pant of his right leg.  On the outside of the
hairy, spare but muscular limb, an ugly old dirty-white scar zigzagged
from knee to ankle.

"Paythan knife," he informed them briefly, "but I did th' blowke in wot
give it me."  He launched into a lurid account of a border hill-scuffle
that his regiment had been engaged in relating all its ghastly details
with great gusto.  "Cleared me lance-point ten times that d'y," he
remarked laconically.  "Flint was aour Orf'cer Commandin'--Old 'Doolally
Flint'--'ard old 'ranker' 'e wos.  'E'd worked us sumphin' crool that
week.  Night marches an' wot not.  I tell yer that man 'ad no 'eart for
men or 'orses.  An' you tork ababt bein' reel reg'mental, Mac! . . . 'e
wos a reg'mental old soor if yer like! . . .  Fit to drop we wos--wot wos
left o' us, an' th' bloody sun goin' down an' all.  But no! 'e give us no
rest--burial fatigue right away.  Free big trenches we buried aour pore
fellers in--I can see 'em now. . . ."

For some few seconds he ceased polishing his glossy, mahogany-shaded "Sam
Browne" belt, and, chin in hand, stared unseeingly straight in front of
him.  His audience waited.  "Arterwards!" he cleared his throat,
"arterwards--w'en we'd filled in 'e made us put th' trimmin's on--line
'em out 'ead an' foot wiv big bowlders.  I mind I'd jes kern a-staggerin'
ap wiv a big stowne for th' 'ead o' Number Free trench, but Doolally kep
me a-markin time till 'e wos ready.  'Kem ap a bit, Private 'Ardy,' 'e
sez, 'kem ap a bit! you're aht o' yer dressin'!' 'e sez.  'Arry Wagstaff,
as wos in Number Two Squordron 'e pulls a bit o' chork aht of 'is pocket,
an' 'e marks on 'is bowlder in big, fat letters 'Lucky soors--in bed
ev'ry night'--but old Doolally 'appened to turn rahnd an' cop 'im at it.
Drum-'ead coort-martial 'Arry gort for that, an' drew ten d'ys Number One
Field Punishment.  But that wos old Doolally all over . . . yer might s'y
'e 'adn't no sense o' 'umor, that man.  Down country we moves next d'y,
for Peshawur, where th' reg'ment lay.  We'd copped a thunderin' lot o'
prisoners--th' Mullah an' all."

"Wha' d'ye ca' a Mullah?" queried McSporran, with grave interest.

Hardy, carbine-barrel between knees--struggled with a "pull-through."
"Mullah? well, 'e's a sorter--sorter 'ead blowke," he mumbled lamely.

"Kind of High Priest?" ventured George.

The old soldier beamed upon him gratefully, "Ar, that's wot I meant.  'E
stunk that 'igh th' Colonel 'e sez--"

The storm doors banged below.  "Redmond!--oh, Redmond!"  The great,
booming, bass voice rang echoing up the stairway.  Involuntarily they all
sprang to an attitude of alert attention.  Rarely did Tom Belcher have to
speak twice around Barracks.

"There's the S.M.!" muttered George.  Aloud he responded "Coming,
Sergeant-Major!"  And he swung downstairs where a powerfully-built man in
a snow and ice-incrusted fur coat awaited him.

"The O.C.'s orders, Redmond!--get your kit packed and hold yourself in
readiness to pull out on the eleven o'clock West-bound to-morrow.  You're
transferred to the Davidsburg detachment.  I'll give you your
transport-requisition later."

The storm doors banged behind him, and then, Redmond, not without design,
forced himself to saunter slowly--very slowly--upstairs again, whistling
nonchalantly the while.

Expectant faces greeted him.  "What's up?" they chorused.  With a fine
assumption of indifference he briefly informed them.  McSporran received
the news with his customary stolidity, only his gray eyes twinkled and he
chuntered something that was totally unintelligible to anyone save
himself.  But its effect upon McCullough and Hardy was peculiar, not to
say, startling in the extreme.  With brush and burnisher clutched in
their respective hands they both turned and gaped upon him fish-eyed for
the moment.  Then, as their eyes met, those two worthies seemed to
experience a difficulty of articulation.

Dumfounded himself, George looked from one to the other, "What the
devil's wrong with you fools?" he queried irritably.

Thereupon, McCullough, still holding the eyes of the Cockney, gasped out
one magical word--"Yorkey!"

The spell was broken.  "W'y, gorblimey!" said Hardy, "Ain't that
queer?--that's jes' wot I wos a-thinkin' . . .  Well, Gawd 'elp Sorjint
Slavin now!"  With which cryptic utterance he resumed his eternal
polishing.

"Amen!" responded the farrier piously, "Reddy, here, an' Yorkey on th'
same detachment. . . .  What th' one don't know t'other'll teach
him. . . .  You'd better let 'em have th' parrot, too."

McSporran, back on his cot with hands clasped behind his head, gobbled an
owlish "Hoot, mon! th' twa o' them thegither! . . .  Losh! but that beats
a' . . . but, hoo lang, O Lard? hoo lang?"

From various sources George had picked up the broken ends of many strange
rumours relating to the personality and escapades of one Constable Yorke,
of the Davidsburg detachment, whom he had never seen as yet.  A hint
here, a whisper there, a shrug and a low-voiced jest between the
sergeant-major and the quartermaster, overheard one day in the Matter's
store.  To Redmond it seemed as if a veil of mystery had always enveloped
the person and doings of this man, Yorke.  The glamour of it now aroused
all his latent curiosity.

"Why, what sort of a chap is this Yorke?" he inquired casually.

McCullough, busily burnishing a bit, shrugged deprecatingly and laughed.
Hardy, putting the last touches to his revolver-holster, made answer,
George thought, with peculiar reticence.

"Wot, Yorkey? . . . oh, 'e's a 'oly terror 'e is. . . .  You arst
Crampton," he mumbled--"arst Taylor--they wos at Davidsburg wiv 'im.
Slavin's orl right but Yorkey!". . .  He looked unutterable things.
"Proper broken down Old Country torff 'e is, too.  'E's right there wiv
th' goods at police work, they s'y, but 'e's sure a bad un to 'ave to
live wiv.  Free weeks on'y, Crampton stuck it afore 'e applied for a
transfer--Taylor, 'e on'y stuck it free d'ys."

Redmond made a gesture of exasperation.  "Ah-h! come off the perch!" he
snarled pettishly, "what sort of old 'batman's' gaff are you trying to
'get my goat' with?"

His display of irritation drew an explosive, misthievous cachinnation
from the trio.

"Old 'batman's' gaff?" echoed the Cockney grinning, "orl right, my fresh
cove--this time next week you'll be tellin' us wevver it's old 'batman's'
gaff, or not."

Outside, the blizzard still moaned and beat upon the windows, packing the
wind-driven snow in huge drifts about the big main building.  Inside, the
canteen roared--

  "_Then--I--say, boys! who's for a drink with me?
  Rum, tum! tiddledy-um! we'll have a fair old spree!_"

McSporran slid off his cot with surprising alacrity.  "Here's ane!" he
announced blithely.  Hardy, carefully hanging up his spotless, glossy
equipment at the head of his cot, turned to the farrier who was likewise
engaged in arranging a bridle and a pipe-clayed headrope.

"Wot abaht it, Mac?" he queried briskly.

McCullough, in turn looked at Redmond.  "All right!" responded that young
gentleman with a boyish shrug and grin, "come on then, you bloomin' old
sponges! let's wet my transfer.  I'll have time to pack my kit to-morrow,
before the West-bound pulls out."

Upon their departing ears, grown wearily familiar to its
monotonous repetition, fell the parrot's customary adieu, as that
disreputable-looking bird swung rhythmically to and fro on its perch.

"Goo' bye!" it gabbled, "A soldier's farewell' to yeh! goo' bye! goo'
bye!"




CHAPTER II

  _Homeless, ragged and tanned,
  Under the changeful sky;
  Who so free in the land?
  Who so contented as I?_.
                         THE VAGABOND


The long-drawn-out, sweet notes of "Reveille" rang out in the frosty
dawn.  Reg. No. ---- Const George Redmond, engaged at that moment in
pulling on his "fatigue-slacks" hummed the trumpet-call's time-honoured
vocal parody--

  "_I sold a cow, I sold a cow, an' bought a donk-ee--'
  Oh--what--a silly old sot you were_!"

The room buzzed like a drowsy hive with hastily dressing men.  Breathing
hotly on the frosted window-pane next his cot, George rubbed a clear
patch and glued his eye to it.  The blizzard had died out during the
night leaving the snow-drifted landscape frosty, still and clear.  A
rapidly widening strip of blended rose and pale turquoise on the eastern
horizon gave promise of a fine day.

He turned away with a contented sigh and, descending the stairs, fell in
with the rest of the fur-coated, moccasined men on "Morning Stable
Parade."

Three hours later, breakfast despatched, blankets rolled and kit and
dunnage bags packed, he received a curt summons from the sergeant-major
to attend the Orderly-room.  To the brisk word of command he was
"quick-_marched_" "left-_wheeled_," and "halted" at "attention" before
the desk of the Officer Commanding L. Division.

"Constable Redmond, Sir!" announced the deep-throated, rumbling bass of
the sergeant-major; and for some seconds George gazed at the silvery hair
and wide bowed shoulders of the seated figure in front of him, who
continued his perusal of some type-written sheets of foolscap, as if
unaware of any interruption.  Elsewhere have the kindly personality and
eccentricities of Captain Richard Bargrave been described; "but that," as
Kipling says, "is another story."

Presently the papers were cast aside, the bowed shoulders in the
splendidly-cut blue-serge uniform squared back in the chair, and Redmond
found himself being scrutinized intently by the all-familiar bronzed old
aristocratic countenance, with its sweeping fair moustache.
Involuntarily he stiffened, though his eyes, momentarily overpowered by
the intensity of that keen gaze, strayed to the level of his superior's
breast and focussed themselves upon two campaign ribbons there,
"North-West Rebellion" and "Ashantee" decorations.

Suddenly the thin, high, cultured voice addressed
him--whimsically--sarcastic but not altogether unkindly:

"The Sergeant-Major"--the gold-rimmed pince-nez were swung to an
elevation indicating that individual and the fair moustache was twirled
pensively--"the Sergeant-Major reports that--er--for the past six months
you have been conducting yourself around the Post with fair average"--the
suave tones hardened--"that you have wisely refrained from indulging your
youthful fancies in any more such--er--dam-fool antics, Sir, as
characterized your merry but brief career at the Gleichen detachment,
so--er--I have decided to give you another chance.  I have here"--he
fumbled through some papers--"a request from Sergeant Slavin for another
man at Davidsburg.  I am transferring you there.  Slavin--er--damn the
man! damn the man! what's wrong with him, Sergeant-Major? . . .  Two men
have I sent him in as many months, and both of 'em, after a few days
there, on some flimsy pretext or another, applied for transfers to other
detachments.  Good men, too.  If this occurs again--damme!"--he glared at
his subordinate--"I'll--er--bring that Irish 'ginthleman' into the Post
for a summary explanation.  Wire him of this man's transfer! . . .  All
right, Sergeant-Major!"

"About-turrn!--quick-march!" growled again the bass voice of the senior
non-com; and he kept step behind George into the passage.  "Here's your
transport requisition, Redmond.  Now--take a tumble to yourself, my
lad--on this detachment.  You're getting what 'Father' don't give to
many--a second chance.  Good-bye!"

George gripped the proffered hand and looked full into the kindly,
meaning eyes.  "Good-bye, S.M.!" he said huskily, "Thanks!"


Westward, the train puffed its way slowly along a slight, but continual
up-grade through the foothills, following more or less the winding course
of the Bow River.  Despite the cold, clear brilliance of the day, seen
under winter conditions the landscape on either side of the track
presented a rather forlorn, dreary picture.  So it appeared to George,
anyway, as he gazed out of the window at the vast, spreading,
white-carpeted valley, the monotonous aspect of which was only
occasionally relieved by sparsely-dotted ranches, small wayside stations,
or when they thundered across high trestle bridges over the
partly-frozen, black, steaming river.

Two summers earlier he had travelled the same road, on a luxurious trip
to the Coast.  The memory of its scenic splendor then, the easy-going
stages from one sumptuous mountain resort to another, now made him feel
slightly dismal and discontented with his present lot.  Eye-restful
solace came however with the sight of the ever-nearing glorious
sun-crowned peaks of the mighty "Rockies," sharply silhouetted against
the dazzling blue of the sky.

Children's voices behind him suddenly broke in upon his reverie.

"That man!" said a small squeaking treble, "was a hobo.  He was sitting
in that car in front with the hard seats an' I went up to him an' I said,
'Hullo, Mister! why don't you wash your face an' shave it? we've all
washed our faces this morning' . . . .  We did, didn't we, Alice?--an'
washed Porkey's too, an' he said 'Hullo, Bo! wash my face?--I don't have
to--I might catch cold.'"

"But Jerry!" said another child's voice, "I don't think he could have
been a real hobo, or he'd have had an empty tomato-can hanging around his
neck on a string, like the pictures of 'Weary Willie' an' 'Tired Tim' in
the funny papers."

Then ensued the sounds as of a juvenile scuffle and squawk.  Master Jerry
apparently resented having his pet convictions treated in this "Doubting
Thomas" fashion, for the next thing George heard him say, was:

"Goozlemy, goozlemy, goozlemy! . . .  No! he hadn't got a tomato-can,
silly! but he'd got a big, fat bottle in his pocket an' he pulled the
cork out of it an' sucked an' I said 'What have you got in your bottle?'
an' he said 'Cold tea' but it didn't smell a bit like cold tea.  There's
a Mounted Policeman sitting in that seat in front of us.  Let's ask him.
Policemen always lock hoboes up in gaol an' kick them in the stomach,
like you see them in the pictures."

The next instant there came a pattering of little feet and two small
figures scrambled into the vacant seat in front of Redmond.  His gaze
fell on a diminutive, red-headed, inquisitive-faced urchin of some eight
years, and a small, gray-eyed, wistful-looking maiden, perhaps about a
year younger, with hair that matched the boy's in colour.  Under one
dimpled arm she clutched tightly to her--upside-down--a fat, squirming
fox-terrier puppy.  Hand-in-hand, in an attitude of breathless,
speculative awe, they sat there bolt upright, like two small gophers;
watching intently the face of the uniformed representative of the Law, as
if seeking some reassuring sign.

It came presently--a kind, boyish, friendly smile that gained the
confidence of their little hearts at once.

"Hullo, nippers!" he said cheerily.

"Hullo!" the two small trebles responded.

"What's your name, son?"

"Jerry!"

"Jerry what?"

An uneasy wriggle and a moment's hesitation then--"Jeremiah!" came a
small--rather sulky--voice.

Breathing audibly in her intense eagerness the little girl now came to
the rescue.

"Please, policeman?" she stopped and gulped excitedly--"please,
policeman?--he doesn't like to be called that. . . .  It isn't _his_
fault.  He always throws stones at the bad boys when they call him that.
Call him just 'Jerry.'"

That gamin, turning from a minute examination of Redmond's spurred
moccasins, began to swing his chubby legs and bounce up and down upon the
cushioned seat.

"Her name's Alice," he volunteered, with a sidelong fling of his
carrot-tinted head.  "Yes! she's my sister"--he made a snatch at the pup
whose speedy demise was threatened, from blood to the head--"don't hold
Porkey that way, Alice! his eyes'll drop out."

But his juvenile confrere shrugged away from his clutch.  "Stupid!" she
retorted, with fine scorn, "no they won't . . . . it's on'y guinea pigs
that do that!--when you hold them up by their tails."  Nevertheless she
promptly reversed that long-suffering canine, which immediately
demonstrated its gratitude by licking her face effusively.

The all-important question of the hobo was next commended to his
attention, with a tremendous amount of chattering rivalry, and, with
intense gravity he was cogitating how to render a satisfactory finding to
both factions when steps, and the unmistakable rustle of skirts, sounded
in his immediate rear.  Then a lady's voice said, "Oh, there you are,
children! . . .  I was wondering where you'd got to."

The two heads bobbed up simultaneously, with a joyful "Here's Mother!"
and George, turning, glanced with innate, well-bred curiosity at a stout,
pleasant-faced, middle-aged woman who stood beside them.

"I hope these young imps haven't been bothering you?" she said.  "We were
in that car behind, but I was reading and they've been having a great
time romping all over the place.  Oh, well!  I suppose it's too much to
expect children to keep still on a train."

With a fond motherly caress she patted the two small flaming heads that
now snuggled boisterously against her on either side.

"Come now!  Messrs. Bubble and Squeak!" she urged teasingly,
"march!--back to our car again!"

"Bubble and Squeak" seemed appropriate enough just then, to judge by the
many fractious objections immediately voiced by those two small
mutineers.  They were loth to part with their latest acquaintance and
weren't above advertising that fact with unnecessary vehemence.  Even the
puppy raised a snuffling whine.

"Boo-hoo!" wailed Jerry, "don't want to go in the other car--me an' Alice
want to stay here--the policeman's goin' to tell us all about
hoboes--he--"

"Oh, dear!" came a despairing little sigh, "whatever--"

Their eyes met and, at the droll perplexity he read in hers, George
laughed outright.  An explosive frank boyish laugh.  He rose with a
courteous gesture.  "I'm afraid it's a case of 'if the mountain won't
come to Mahomet,'" he began, with gay sententiousness.  "Won't you sit
down?"

The matron's kindly eyes appraised the bold, manly young face a moment,
then, with a certain leisurely grace, she stepped in between the seats
and, seating herself, lugged her two small charges down beside her.

"I suppose, under the circumstances, an old woman like me can discard the
conventionalities?" she remarked smilingly.

Jerry and Alice leered triumphantly at their victim.  "Now!" Jerry
shrilled exactingly "tell us all about hoboes!"

"They do carry empty tomato-cans, don't they?" pleaded Alice.

It was now their guardian's turn to laugh at his dismay.  "You see what
you've let yourself in for now?" she remarked.

"Seems I am up against it," he admitted, with a rueful grin, "well! must
make good somehow, I suppose?"

With an infinitely boyish gesture he tipped his fur cap to the back of
his head and leaned forward with finger-tips compressed in approved
story-telling fashion.

"Once upon a time!--" a breathless "Yes-s"--those two small faces
reminded him much of terriers watching a rat-hole--"there was a hobo."
He thought hard.  "He was a very dirty old hobo--he never used to wash
his face.  He was walking along the road one day when he heard a little
wee voice call out 'Hey!'.  He looked down and he saw an empty tomato-can
on a rubbish heap.  Tomato-cans used to be able to talk in those days and
the hoboes were very good to them--always used to drink out of them and
carry them to save them from walking.  This can had a picture of its big
red face on the outside.  'Give us a lift?' said the can.  'Where to?'
said the old hobo.  'Back to California, where I came from,' said the
can.  'All right!' said the old hobo, 'I'm goin' there, too.'  And he
picked the can up and hung it round his neck and kept on walking till
they came to a house.  The window of the house was open and they could
see a big fat bottle on a little table.  'Ah!' said the old hobo 'here's
an old friend of mine!--he's comin' with us, too,'  And he shoved his arm
through the window and put the bottle in his pocket.  By and by they came
to a river--'Hey!' said the can, again--'What's up?' said the old
hobo--'I'm dry,' said the can--'So am I,' said the hobo; and he dipped
the can in the water and gave it a very little drink.  'Hey!' said the
can, 'give us a drop more!'--'Wait a bit!' said the old hobo, and he
pulled the cork out of the bottle.  'Don't you pour any of that feller
into me!' said the can, 'he'll burn my inside out--an' yours--if you pour
him into me I'll open my mouth where I'm soldered and let him run out,
and you won't be able to drink out of me any more.  Chuck him into the
river!--he's no good.'

"'You shut your mouth!' said the old hobo, 'or I'll chuck you into the
river!'  And he poured some of the stuff out of the bottle into the can--"

At this exciting point poor George halted for breath and mopped his
forehead.  He felt fully as thirsty as the tomato-can.  But the children
were upon him, clutching his scarlet tunic:

"What did he do then?" howled Jerry.

"Eh?" gasped the young policeman,--"oh, he opened his mouth where he was
soldered and let the stuff run out.  So the old hobo threw him into the
river.  That's why hoboes always pack a bottle with them now instead of a
tomato-can."

He leaned back with a sigh and, thrusting his hands deep into his
pockets, smiled wanly at his vis-à-vis.

"There!" he said, with feeble triumph, "I've carried out the sentence."

And it did him good to drink in her mirthful, waggish laugh.

"Yes!" she conceded gaily, "you certainly did great execution, though you
look more like a prisoner just reprieved."

Jerry, screwing up his small snub nose leered triumphantly across her lap
at Alice.  "Goozlemy, goozlemy, goozlemy!" he squeaked, "that man was a
real hobo."

His grimace was returned with interest.  Alice hugged her puppy awhile
contentedly, murmuring in that canine's ear, "What a silly old thing that
tomato-can must have been.  If I'd been him I'd have kept my mouth shut."

"Cow Run!" intoned the brakeman monotonously, passing through the
coaches, "Cow Run next stop!"  His eye fell on Redmond.  "Wish I'd seen
you before, Officer!" he remarked, "I'd have had a hobo for you.  Beggar
stole a ride on us from Glenbow, back there.  The con's goin' to chuck
him off here--do you want him?"

"No!" said Redmond shortly, "let the stiff go--I'm going on to
Davidsburg--haven't got time to get messing around with 'vags' now."

The train began to slow down and presently stopped at a small station.
Mechanically the quartette gazed through the window at the few shivering
platform loungers, and beyond them to the irregular, low-lying facade of
snow-plastered buildings that comprised the dreary main street of the
little town.

Suddenly the children uttered a shrill yelp.

"There he is!" cried Alice, darting a small finger at the window-pane.

"I saw him first!" bawled Jerry.

And, slouching past along the platform, all huddled-up with hands in
pockets, George beheld a ragged nondescript of a man whose appearance
confirmed Master Jerry's previous assertion beyond doubt.

The children drummed on the window excitedly.  Glancing up at the two
small peering faces the human derelict's red-nosed, stubble-coated visage
contorted itself into a friendly grimace of recognition; at the same
time, with an indescribably droll, swashbuckling swagger he doffed a
shocking dunghill of a hat.

Suddenly though his jaw dropped and, replacing his battered headpiece,
with double-handed indecent haste the knight of the road executed an
incredibly nimble "right-about turn" and vanished behind the
station-house.  Just then came the engine's toot! toot!, the conductor's
warning "All aboar-rd!" and the train started once more on its journey
westward.

Smiling grimly to himself, the policeman settled back in his seat again
and glanced across at the lady.  She was shaking with convulsive laughter.

"Oh!" she giggled hysterically "he--he must have seen your red coat!"
another spasm of merriment, "it was as good as a pantomime," she murmured.

Evincing a keen interest in his soldierly vocation, for awhile she
subjected him to an exacting and minute inquisition anent the duties and
life of a Mounted Policeman.  In this agreeable fashion the time passed
rapidly and it was with a feeling of regret that he heard the brakeman
announce his destination and rose to take leave of his pleasant
companion.  The children insisted on bidding their late chum a cuddling,
osculatory farewell--Alice tearfully holding up the snuffling Porkey for
his share.  The train drew up at the Davidsburg platform, there came a
chorus of "Good-byes" and a few minutes later George was left alone with
his kit-bags on the deserted platform.




CHAPTER III

  _St. Agnes' Eve.  Ah! bitter chill it was.
    The owl, for all his feathers, was a-cold;
  The hare limped, trembling, through the frozen grass;
    And drowsy was the flock in woolly fold_.
                                        ST. AGNES' EVE


Edmond did not have to wait long.  Sounding faint and far off came the
silvery ring of sleigh-bells, gradually swelling in volume until, with a
measured crunch! crunch! of hoofs on packed snow, a smart Police cutter,
drawn by a splendid bay team, swung around a bend of the trail and pulled
up at the platform.  Redmond regarded with a little awe the huge,
bear-like, uniformed figure of the teamster, whom he identified at once
from barrack gossip.

"Sergeant Slavin?" he enquired respectfully, eyeing the bronzed,
clean-shaven face, half hidden by fur cap and turned-up collar.

"Meself, lad!" came a rich soft brogue, "I was afther gettin' a wire from
th' O.C., tellin' me he was thransfering me another man.  Yer name's
Ridmond, ain't it?---Whoa, now!  T an' B!--lively wid thim kit-bags,
son!--team's pretty fresh an' will not shtand."

They swung off at a spanking trot.  George surveyed the white-washed
cattle-corrals and few scattered shacks which seemed to comprise the
hamlet of Davidsburg.

"Not a very big place, Sergeant?" he remarked, "how far's the detachment
from here?"

"On'y 'bout a mile" grunted the individual, squirting a stream of
tobacco-juice to leeward, "up on the high ground beyant.  Nay! 'tis just
a jumpin' off place an' shippin' point for th' ranches hereabouts.
Business is mostly done at Cow Run--East.  Ye passed ut, comin'.  Great
doin's there--whin th' cowpunchers blow in.  Some burg!"

"Sure looked it!" Redmond agreed absently, thinking of the casual glimpse
he had got of the dreary main street.

They were climbing a slight grade.  The sun-glare on the snow was
intense; the cutter's steel runners no longer screeched, and the team's
hoofs began to clog up with soft snow.

"They're 'balling-up' pretty bad, Sergeant!" remarked Redmond.  And, as
he spoke the "off" horse suddenly slipped and fell, and, plunging to its
feet again, a leg slid over the cutter's tongue.

"Whoa, now! whoa!" barked Slavin, with an oath, as the mettled,
high-strung animal began to kick affrightedly.  Slipping again it sank
down in the snow and remained still for some tense moments.

Like a flash Redmond sprang from the cutter, and rapidly and warily he
unhooked the team's traces.  This done he crept to their heads and
slipped the end of the tongue out of the neck-yoke ring.  Slavin by this
time was also on his feet in the snow, with the situation well in hand.
He clucked softly to his team, the fallen horse plunged to its feet again
and the next moment all was clear.  George, burrowing around in the snow
unearthed a big stone, with which he proceeded to tap the team's shoes
all round until the huge snow-clogs fell out.  In silence the two men
hooked up again and were soon on their way.

"H-mm!" grunted the big Irishman at last, eyeing his subordinate with a
sidelong glance of approval, "h-mm! teamster?"

"Oh, I don't know, Sergeant" responded Redmond deprecatingly, "of course
I've been around teams some--down East, on the old man's farm. . .  I
don't know that I can claim to be a real teamster--as you judge them in
the Force."

"H-mm!" grunted Slavin again, "ye seem tu have th' makin's anyway."  He
expectorated musingly.  "Wan time--down at Coutts 'twas--a young feller
was sint tu me for tu dhrive.  Mighty chipper gossoon, tu.  'Teamster?'
sez I--'Some!' sez he, as if he was a reg'lar gun at th' business--'but
I'm gen'rally reckoned handier wid a foursome 'n a single team.'"

"'Oh!' sez I, 'fwhere?'  An' he tould me--Regina.  Sez I thin ''tis
Skinner Adams's undershtudy ye must have bin?--for he was Reg'mentil
Teamster Sarjint there, an' sure fwas a great man wid a four-in-hand
team.'"

"'Fwat, ould Skinner Adams?' sez me bould lad, kind av contempshus-like,
'Humph! at shtringin' out four I have Skinner Adams thrimmed tu a peak.'
We was dhrivin' from th' station tu th' detachmint--same like tu we're
doin' now.  Whin we gits in I unhitches an' puts up th' team.  'Give us a
hand tu shling th' harniss off!' sez I tu him--an' me shmart Aleck makes
a shtab at ut wid th' nigh horse.  He was not quite so chipper--thin, an'
I noticed his hands thremblin', an' he was all th' time watchin' me close
how I did wid th' off harse.  I dhraws off wid th' britchin' on me
arrum--'Come!' sez I--an' he shtarts in--unbucklin' th' top hame-shtrap.

"'As ye were!' sez I 'that's enough!  I'm thinkin' th' on'y 'four' you
iver shtrung out me young flapdhoodle was a gang av prisoners, an'
blarney me sowl! ye shall go back tu th' Post right now, an' du
prisoner's escort agin for awhile.'"

They had now reached the top of the grade where the trail swung due east,
and faced a dazzling sun and cutting wind which whipped the blood to
their cheeks and made their eyes water.

"Behould our counthry eshtate!" said Sergeant Slavin grandiloquently,
with an airy wave of his arm, "beyant that big pile av shtones on th'
road-allowance."

He chirped to his team which broke into an even, fast trot, and presently
they drew up outside a building typical in its outside appearance of the
usual range Mounted Police detachment.  It was a fairly large dwelling,
roughly but substantially-built of squared logs, painted in customary
fashion, with the walls--white, and the shingled roof--red.  A
strongly-guyed flagstaff jutting out from one gable, and copies of the
"Game" and "Fire Acts" tacked on the door gave the abode an unmistakable
official aspect.  Over the doorway was nailed a huge, prehistoric-looking
buffalo-skull, bleached white with the years--the time-honoured insignia
of the R.N.W.M.P. being a buffalo-head, which is also stamped on the
regimental badge and button.

Dumping off the kit-bags, the two men drove round to the stable in the
rear of the main dwelling, where they unhitched and put up the team.  The
sergeant led the way into the house.  Passing through a small store-house
and kitchen they emerged into the living room.  On a miniature scale it
was a replica of one of the Post barrack-rooms, except that the table
boasted a tartan-rugged covering, that two or three easy chairs were
scattered around, and some calfskin mats partially covered the painted
hardwood floor.  The walls, for the most part were adorned with many
unframed copies of pictures from the brush of that great Western artist,
Charles Russell, and black and white sketches cut from various
illustrated papers.  Three corners of the room contained cots, one of
which the sergeant assigned to Redmond.  The room, with its big stove, in
a way looked comfortable enough, and was regimentally neat and clean and
homelike.

George peered into the front room beyond which bore quite a judicial
aspect.  At one end of it a small dais supported a severe-looking
arm-chair and a long flat desk, on which were piled foolscap, blank legal
forms, law-books, and the Bible.  In front was a long, form-like bench,
with a back to it.  At the rear of the room were two strongly-built
cells, with barred doors.  Around the walls were scattered a double row
of small chairs and, on a big, green-baize-covered board next the cells
hung a brightly burnished assortment of handcuffs and leg-irons.

"'Tis here we hould coort," Slavin informed him, "whin we have any
shtiffs tu be thried."

Opening the front door George lugged in his bedding and kit-bags and,
depositing them on his cot, flung off his fur coat, cap, and serge.
Slavin divested himself likewise and, as the burly, bull-necked man stood
there, slowly filling his pipe, Redmond was able to scan the face and
massive proportions of his superior more closely.

Standing well over six feet, for the presentment of vast, though
perchance clumsy, gorilla-like strength, George reflected with slight awe
that he had never seen the man's equal.  His wide-spreading shoulders
were more rounded than square; his deep, arching chest, powerful, stocky
nether limbs and disproportionately long, huge-biceped arms seeming to
fit him as an exponent of the mat rather than the gloves.  Truly a
daunting figure to meet in a close-quarter, rough-and-tumble encounter!
thought Redmond.  The top of his head was completely bald; his thick,
straight black brows indicating that what little close-cropped iron-gray
hair remained must originally have been coal-black in colour.  His
Irish-blue eyes, alternately dreamy and twinklingly alert, were deeply
set in a high-cheeked-boned, bronzed face, with a long upper-lipped,
grimly-humorous mouth.  Its expression in repose gave subtle warning that
its owner possessed in a marked degree the strongly melancholic,
emotional, and choleric temperament of his race.  There was no
moroseness--no hardness in it, but rather the taciturnity that invariably
settles upon the face of those dwellers of the range who, perforce, live
much alone with their thoughts.  Sheathed in mail and armed, that face
and bulky figure to some imaginations might have found its prototype in
some huge, grim, war-worn "man-at-arms" of mediaeval times.  Redmond
judged him to be somewhere in his forties; forty-two was his exact age as
he ascertained later.

In curious contrast to his somewhat formidable exterior seemed his mild,
gentle, soft-brogued voice.  And with speech, his taciturn face relaxed
insensibly into an almost genial expression, George noted.

Attracted by a cluster of pictures and photographs above and around the
cot in the corner opposite his own, the young fellow crossed over and
scanned them attentively.  Tacked up with a random, reckless hand, the
bizarre collection was typically significant of someone's whimsical,
freakish tastes and personality.  From the sublime to the ridiculous--and
worse--subjects pious and impious, dreamily-beautiful and lewdly-vulgar,
comic and tragic, also many splendid photographs were all jumbled
together on the walls in a shockingly irresponsible fashion.  Many of the
pictures were unframed copies cut apparently from art and other journals;
from theatrical and comic papers.

George gazed on them awhile in utterly bewildered astonishment; then,
with a little hopeless ejaculation, swung around to the sergeant who met
his despairing grin with benign composure.

"Whose cot's--"

"'Tis Yorke's," said Slavin simply.  It was the first time he had
mentioned that individual's name.  He struck a match on the seat of his
pants and standing with his feet apart and hands clasped behind his back
smoked awhile contentedly.

"Saw ye iver th' like av that for divarsiment?" he continued, with a wave
of his pipe at the heterogeneous array, "shtudy thim! an', by an' large
ye have th' man himsilf.  He's away on pay-day duty at th' Coalmore mines
west av here--though by token, 'tis Billy Blythe at Banff shud be doin'
ut, 'stead av me havin' tu sind a man from here.  He shud be back on
Number Four th' night."

His twinkling orbs under their black smudge of eyebrow appraised the
junior constable with faint, musing interest.  "A quare chap is Yorkey,"
he continued gently--shielding a match-flame and puffing with noisy
respiration--"a good polisman--knows th' Criminal Code from A tu Z--eyah!
but mighty quare.  I misdoubt how th' tu av yez will get along."  He
sighed deeply, muttering half to himself, "I may have tu take
shteps--this time! . . ."

A rather ominous beginning, thought George.  But, curbing his natural
curiosity, he resolutely held his peace, awaiting more enlightenment.
This not being forthcoming--his superior having relapsed once more into
taciturn silence--he turned again to Yorke's exhibits with pondering
interest.  Sounding far-off and indistinct in the frosty stillness of the
bleak foothills came the faint echoes of a coyote's shrill
"ki-yip-yapping"--again and again, as if endeavouring to convey some
insidious message.  George continued to stare at the pictures.  Gad! what
a strange fantastic mind the man must have! he mused--what rotten,
erratic desecration to shove pictures indiscriminately together like
that! . . .  Lack of space was no excuse.  Millet's "Angelus," "Ally
Sloper at the Derby," a splendid lithograph of "The Angel of Pity at the
Well of Cawnpore," Lottie Collins, scantily attired, in her song and
dance "Tara-ra-ra-boom-de-ay," Sir Frederick Leighton's "Wedded," a
gruesome depiction of a Chinese execution at Canton, an old-fashioned
engraving of that dashing, debonair cavalry officer, "Major Hodson," of
Indian Mutiny fame, George Robey, as a nurse-maid, wheeling Little Tich
in a perambulator, the grim, torture-lined face of Slatin Pasha, a
ridiculously obscene picture entitled "Two coons scoffing oysters for a
wager," that glorious edifice the "Taj Mahal" of India, and so on.
"Divarsiment" indeed!

To this ill-assorted admixture three exceptions only were grouped with
any sense of reason.  The central picture was a beautifully coloured
reproduction of Sir Hubert Herkomer's famous masterpiece "The Last
Muster."  Lovers of art subjects are doubtless familiar with this
immortal painting.  It depicts a pathetic congregation of old,
white-haired, war-worn pensioners attending divine service in the chapel
of Old Chelsea Hospital, with the variegated lights from the
stained-glass windows flooding them with soft gentle colours.  Flanking
it on either side were portraits of the original founders of this
historical institution in 1692--Charles II (The Merry Monarch) and his
kindly-hearted "light o' love" Sweet Nell Gwynn of Old Drury.

With curiously mixed feelings George finally tore himself away from
Yorke's pathetically grotesque attempt at wall-adornment.  Strive as he
would within his soul to ridicule, the pictures seemed somehow almost to
shout at him with hidden meaning.  As if a voice--a drunken voice, but
gentlemanly withall--was hiccuping in his ear: "Paradise Lost, old man!
(hic) Paradise Lost!"

And, mixed with it, came again out of the silence of the foothills the
coyote's faintly persistent mocking wail--its "ki-yip-yap" sounding
almost like "Bah!  Yah!  Baa!" . . .  Some lines of an old quotation,
picked up he knew not where, wandered into his mind--

  _Comedy, Tragedy, Laughter and Tears!
  Thou'rt rolled as one in the Dust of Years_!

With a sigh he turned to his own cot and began to unpack and arrange his
kit; in regulation fashion, and with such small faddy fixings customary
to men inured to barrack life.  Thus engaged the time passed rapidly.
Later in the day he assisted the sergeant in making out the detachment's
"monthly returns" and diary.  This task accomplished, in the gathering
dusk he attended "Evening Stables."  There were two saddle-horses beside
the previously-mentioned team.  A splendid upstanding pair, George
thought them.  He was good with horses; possessing the faculty of
handling them that springs only from a patient, kindly, instinctive love
of animals.

"Nay!  I dhrive mostly," Slavin was telling him, "buckboard an' team's
away handier for a man av weight like meself.  Eyah!" he sighed, "tho'
time was whin I cud throw a leg over wid th' best av thim.  Yorke--he
gen'rally rides th' black, Parson, so ye'll take th' sorrel, Fox, for yeh
pathrols.  He's a good stayer, an' fast.  Ye'll want tu watch him at
mounthin' tho'--he's not a mane harse, but he has a quare thrick av
turnin' sharp tu th' 'off'--just as ye go tu shwing up into th' saddle.
Many's th' man he's whiraroo'd round wid wan fut in th' stirrup an' left
pickin' up dollars off th' bald-headed.'  Well! let's tu supper."

With the practised hand of an old cook he prepared a simple but hearty
repast, upon which they fell with appetites keenly edged with the cold
air.

"Are ye anythin' av a cuk?"

Redmond grinned deprecatingly and then shook his head.

"Eyah!" grumbled Slavin, "seems I cannot hilp bein' cuk an' shtandin'
orderly-man around here.  I thried out Yorkey. . . .  Wan day on'y
tho'--'tis th' divil's own cuk he is.  'Sarjint!' sez he, 'I'm no
bowatchee'--which in Injia he tells me means same as cuk.  An' he tould
th' trute at that."

Some three hours later, as they lay on their cots, came to them the
faint, far-off _toot_! _toot_! of an engine, through the keen atmosphere.

"That's Number Four from th' West," remarked Slavin drowsily, "Yorkey
shud be along on ut.  Well! a walk will not hurt th' man if--"

He chuntered something to himself.

Half an hour elapsed slowly--three quarters.  Slavin rolled off his cot
with a grunt and strode heavily to the front door, which he opened.
Redmond silently followed him and together the two men stepped out into
the crisply-crunching hard-packed snow.  It was a magnificent night.
High overhead in the star-studded sky shone a splendid full moon, its
clear cold rays lighting up the white world around them with a sort of
phosphorescent, scintillating brilliance.

Though not of a particularly sentimental temperament, the calm, peaceful,
unearthly beauty of the scene moved George to murmur--half to himself:

  "_Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
  That dost not bite so nigh
    As benefits forgot, alas!
    As benefits forgot_."

To his surprise came Slavin's soft brogue echoing the last lines of the
old Shakespearian sonnet, with a sort of dreamy, gentle bitterness: "As
binifits forghot--forghot!--as binifits forghot! . . . .  Luk tu that
now! eyah! 'tis th' trute, lad! . . . . for here--unless I am mistuk,
comes me bould Yorkey--an' dhrunk as 'a fiddler's ---- again.  Tchkk! an'
me on'y just afther warnin' um. . . ."

And, a far-away black spot as yet, down the moonlit, snow-banked trail,
indistinctly they beheld an unsteady figure slowly weaving its way
towards the detachment.  At intervals the night-wind wafted to them
snatches of song.

"Singin', singin'," muttered Slavin, "from break av morrn 'till jewy
eve! . . .  Misther B---- Yorke! luks 'tis goin' large y'are th' night."

Nearer and nearer approached the stumbling black figure, weaving an
eccentric course in and out along the line of telephone poles; and, to
their ears came the voice of one crying in the wilderness:--

  "_O, the Midnight Son! the Midnight Son! (hic)
  You needn't go trottin' to Norway--
  You'll find him in ev'ry doorway--_"

A sudden cessation of the music, coupled with certain slightly
indistinct, weird contortions of the vocalist's figure, apprised the
watchers that a snow-bank had momentarily claimed him.  Then, suddenly
and saucily, as if without a break, the throbbing, high-pitched tenor
piped up again--

  "_You'll behold him in his glory
  If you on'y take a run (hic)
  Down the Strand--that's the Land
  Of the Midnight Son_."

Dewy eve indeed!--a far cry to the Strand! . . .  How freakish sounded
that old London variety stage ditty ridiculing the nightly silence of the
great snow-bound Nor' West.  Redmond could not refrain an explosive,
snorting chuckle as he remarked the erratic gait of the slowly
approaching pedestrian.  As Slavin had opined, he was "going large."  His
vocal efforts had ceased temporarily, and now it was the junior
constable's merriment that broke the frosty stillness of the night.

But Slavin did not laugh.  Watchfully he waited there--curiously still,
his head jutting forward loweringly from between his huge shoulders.

"Tchkk!" he clucked in gentle distaste--"In uniform . . . an' just afther
comin' off the thrain! . . .  th' like av that now 'tis--'tis
scandh'lus! . . ."

Suddenly Redmond shivered, and his mirth died within him.  The air seemed
to have become charged with a tense, ominous something that filled him
with a great dread--of what? he knew not.  He felt an inexplicable
impulse to cry out a warning to that ludicrous figure, whose crunching
moccasins were now the only sounds that broke the uncanny stillness of
the night.  To him, the whole scene, bathed in the cold brilliance of its
moonlit setting, seemed ghostly and unreal--a disturbing dream of comedy
and tragedy, intermingled.

Inwards, between the telephone poles, the man came stumbling along,
gradually drawing nigh to the motionless watchers.  Halting momentarily,
during his progress he made a quick stooping action at the base of one of
the poles, as if with vague purpose, which action was remarked at least
by Redmond.

Then, for the first time, he seemed to become aware of their presence,
and making a pitiful attempt to dissemble his condition and assume a
smart, erect military carriage he waved his riding-crop at them by way of
salutation.  Something in his action, its graceful, airy mockery, trivial
though it was, impressed the gestures firmly in Redmond's mind.  He
became cognizant of a flushed, undeniably handsome face with reckless
eyes and mocking lips; a slimly-built figure of a man of medium height,
whose natural grace was barely concealed by the short regimental fur coat.

Halting unsteadily within the regulation three paces pending salute, he
struck an attitude commonly affected by Mr. Sothern, in "Lord Dundreary,"
and jauntily twirled his crop, the while he declaimed:--

  "_Waltz me round again, Willie, Willie,
  Round and round and--_"

"_Round_!" finished Slavin, with a horrible oath.  There seemed something
shockingly aboriginal--simian--in the swift, gorilla-like clutch of his
huge dangling hands, as they fastened on the throat and shoulder of the
drunken man and whirled him on his back in the snow--something deadly and
menacing in his hard-breathing, soft-brogued invective:

"Yeh bloody nightingale! come off th' perch! . . .  I'm fed up wid
yeh!--I'll waltz yeh!--I'll tache yeh tu make a mock av Burke Slavin,
time an' again!  I'll--"

Redmond interposed, "Steady, Sergeant!" he implored shakily, his hand on
his superior's shoulder, "For God's sake--"

But Slavin, in absent fashion, shoved him off.  He seemed to put no
effort in the movement, but the tense muscular impact of it sent Redmond
reeling yards away.

"Giddap, Yorkey!  God d----n ye for a dhrunken waster!--giddap! or I'll
put th' boots tu yeh!"  Terrible was the menace of the giant Irishman's
face, his back-flung boot and his snarling, curiously low-pitched voice.

"No! not Burke, old man! . . . ah, don't!" gasped the rich tenor voice
pleadingly from the snow--"ah, don't, Burke! . . . remember,
remember . . .  St. Agnes' Eve--

  "St. Agnes' Eve.  Ah! bitter chill it was,
  The--"

It broke--that throbbing voice with its strange, impassioned appeal.  Far
away over the snow the faint, silvery ring of a locomotive gong fell upon
the ears of the trio almost like the deep, solemn tolling of bells.

Then slowly, and seemingly in pain, the prostrate man arose.

And yet!  Redmond mused, sorry a figure as he cut just then, minus
fur-cap and plastered with snow, alone with the shame which was his, he
had an air, a certain dignity of mien, this man, Yorke, which stamped him
far above the common run of men.

The junior constable, as he noted the dark hair, silvering and worn away
at the temples, adjudged him to be somewhere between thirty and
forty--thirty-five was his exact age as he ascertained later.

Now, with the air of a fallen angel, he stood there in the cold,
snow-dazzling moonlight; his face registering silent resignation as to
whatever else might befall him.  The sergeant had stepped forward.
Redmond looked on, in dazed apprehension.  A solemn hush had fallen upon
the strange scene, and stranger trio.  Their figures flung weird,
fantastic shadows across the diamond-sparkling snow-crust.  George
glanced at Slavin, and that individual's demeanor amazed him still
further.  The big man's face was transformed.  There seemed something
very terrible just then in the pathetic working of his rugged features,
as if he were striving to allay some powerful inward emotion.  Then
huskily, but not unkindly--as perchance the father may have spoken to the
prodigal son--came his soft brogue:

"Get yu tu bed, Yorkey! get yu tu bed, man! . . . an' thry me no
more! . . . ."

Mutely, like a child, Yorke obeyed the order.  Glancing at Redmond he
turned and walked unsteadily into the detachment.

Perturbed and utterly mystified at the sordid drama he had witnessed, its
amazing combination of brutality and pathos, George remained rooted to
the spot as one in a dream.  Instinctively though, he felt that this was
not the first time of its enactment.  Mechanically he watched the door
close; then sounding far off and indistinct, Slavin's hoarse whisper in
his ear brought him down to Mother Earth again with a vengeance:

"Did ye mark him stoop an' 'plant' th' 'hootch?'"

George nodded.  "I wasn't quite wise to what he was at," he answered.

"Let us go get ut!" said Sergeant Slavin grimly, marching to the spot, "I
will not have dhrink brought into th' detachment! . . . 'tis against
ordhers."

He bent down, straightened up, and turning to Redmond who had joined him
exhibited a bottle.  He held it up to the light of the moon.  It appeared
to be about half empty.  Extracting the cork, he smelt.

"'Tis whiskey," he murmured simply--much as Mr. Pickwick said: "It is
punch."  He made casual examination of the green and gold label.
"'Burke's Oirish,' begob! . . . eyah! a brave ould uniform but"--he
turned a moist eye on his subordinate--"a desp'ritly wounded souldier
that wears ut--betther out av pain.  'Tis an' ould sayin': 'Whin ye meet
th' divil du not turn tail but take um by th' harns.' . . .  Bhoy!  I
thrust the honest face av yeh--I have tuk tu ye since th' handy lad ye
showt yersilf with that team mix-up th' morn."

Redmond, mollified, grinned shiveringly.  "I don't mind a snort,
Sergeant," he said, "it's d----d cold out here.  Beer's more in my line
though.  Salue!"

He took a swallow or two; the bottle changed hands.

"Eyah!" remarked Slavin sometime later--cuddling the bottle at the "port
arms."  "'Tis put th' kibosh on many a good man in th' ould Force has
this same dhrink.  Th' likes av Yorkey there"--he jerked his head at the
lighted window--"shud never touch ut--never touch ut! . . .  Cannot
flirrt wid a bottle--'tis wedded they wud be tu ut.  Now meself"--he
paused impressively--"I can take me dhrink like a ginthleman--can take
ut, or lave ut alone."

Absorptive demonstration followed.  Came a long-drawn, smacking "Ah-hh!"
"A sore thrial tu me is that same man," he resumed, "wan more break on
his part, as ye have seen this night . . . an' I musht--I will take
shteps wid um."

"Why don't you transfer him back to the Post?" queried George,
wonderingly, mindful of how swiftly that disciplinary measure had
rewarded his own reckless conduct at the Gleichen detachment.  "He's got
nothing on you, has he?"

"_Fwhat_?" . . . Slavin, turning like a flash, glared sharply at him out
of deep-set scowling eyes, "Fwhat?"

Tonelessly, George repeated his query,

Slavin's glare gradually faded.  "Eyah!" he affirmed presently, "he
has! . . ." came a long pause--"but not as yu mane ut . . . oh! begorrah,
no!"  His eyes glittered dangerously and his wide mouth wreathed into an
unholy grin, "'Tis a shmart man that iver puts ut over on me at th'
Orderly-room. . .  Fwhy du I not sind him into th' Post? . . . eyah! fwhy
du I not? . . ."

Chin sunk on his huge chest, he mused awhile.

George waited.

"Listen, bhoy!"  A terrible earnestness crept into the soft voice.  "I'll
tell ye th' tale. . . .  'Twas up at th' Chilkoot Pass--in the gold rush
av '98. . . .  Together we was--Yorkey an' meself--stationed there undher
ould Bobby Belcher.  Wan night--Mother av God! will I iver forghet ut?
Bitther cowld is th' Yukon, lad; th' like av ut yu' here in Alberta du
not know.  Afther tu crazy lost _cheechacos_ we had been that day.  We
found thim--frozen. . . .  A blizzard had shprung up, but we shtrapped
th' stiffs on th' sled an' mushed ut oursilves tu save th' dogs.

"I am a big man, an' shtrong . . . . but Yorkey was th' betther man av us
tu that night--havin less weight tu pack.  I was all in--dhrowsy, an'
wanted tu give up th' ghost an' shleep--an' shleep. . . .  Nigh unto
death I was. . . ."

The murmuring voice died away.  A shudder ran through the great frame at
the remembrance, while the hand clutching the bottle trembled violently.
Unconsciously Redmond shook with him; for the horror Slavin was living
over again just then enveloped his listener also.

"But Yorkey," he continued "wud not let me lie down. . . .  God! how that
man did put his fishts an' mucklucks tu me an' pushed an' shtaggered wid
me' afther th' dogs, beggin' an' cursin' an' prayin' an' callin' me names
that ud fairly make th' dead relations av a man rise up out av their
graves. . . .  Light-headed he got towards th' ind av th' thrail, poor
chap! shoutin' dhrill-ordhers an' Injia naygur talk, an' singin' great
songs an' chips av poethry--th' half av which I misremimber--excipt
thim--thim wurrds he said this night.  'Shaint Agnus Eve,' he calls ut.
Over an' over he kept repeathin' thim as he helped me shtaggerin'
along. . . 'God!' cries he, betune cursin' me an' th' dogs an' singin'
'Shaint Agnus Eve'--'Oh, help us this night! let us live, God! . . . oh,
let us live!--this poor bloody Oirishman an' me! . . .'"

The sergeant's head was thrown back now, gazing full at the evening star
the moonbeams shining upon his upturned, powerful face.  Cold as was the
night Redmond could see glistening beads of sweat on his forehead.  As
one himself under the spell of the fear of death, the younger man
silently watched that face--fascinated.  It was calm now, with a great
and kindly peace.  Slowly the gentle voice took up the tale anew:

"We made ut, bhoy--th' Post--or nigh tu ut . . . in th' break av th'
dawn. . . .  For wan av th' dogs yapped an' they come out an' found us in
th' snow. . . .  Yorkey, wid his arrums round th' neck av me--as if he
wud shtill dhrag me on . . . . an' cryin' upon th' mother that bore
um. . . .  Tu men--in damned bad shape--tu shtiffs . . . . an' but three
dogs lift out av th' six-team we'd shtarted wid. . . .  So--now ye know;
lad! . . .  Fwhat think ye? . . ."

What George thought was: "Greater love hath no man than this."  What he
said was: "He's an Englishman, isn't he?"

Slavin nodded.  "Comes of a mighty good family tu, they say, but 'tis
little he iwer cracks on himself 'bout thim.  Years back he hild a
commission in some cavalry reg'mint in Injia, but he got broke--over a
woman, I fancy.  He's knocked about th' wurrld quite a piece since thin.
Eyah! he talks av some quare parts he's been in.  Fwhat doin'?  Lord
knows.  Been up an' down the ladder some in _this_ outfit--sarjint one
week--full buck private next.  Yen know th' way these ginthlemin-rankers
run amuck?"

"How does he get away with it every time?" queried Redmond.  "Hasn't any
civilian ever reported him to the old man?"

"Yes! wance--an' 'Father,' th' ould rapparee! he went for me baldheaded
for not reporthin' ut tu."

With a sort of miserable heartiness Slavin cursed awhile at the
recollection.  "Toime an' again," he resumed, "have I taken my hands tu
um--pleaded wid um, an' shielded um in many a dhirty scrape, an' ivry
toime sez he, wid his ginthlemin's shmile: 'Burke! will ye thry an'
overlook it, ould man?' . . .  Eyah! he's mighty quare.  For some rayson
he seems tu hate th' idea av a third man bein' here, tho' th' man' wud
die for me.  Divil a man can I kape here, anyway.  In fwhat fashion he
puts th' wind up 'him, I do not know; they will not talk, out av pure
kindness av heart an' rispict for meself, I guess.  But--a few days here,
an' bingo!--they apply for thransfer.  Now ye know ivrythin', bhoy--fwhat
I am up against, an' fwhy I will not 'can' Yorkey.  Ye've a face that
begets thrust--do not bethray ut, but thry an' hilp me.  Bear wid Yorke
as best ye can--divilmint an' all--for my sake, will yeh?"

Not devoid of a certain simple dignity was the grim, rugged face that
turned appealingly to the younger man's in the light of the moon.

And Redmond, smiling inscrutably into the deep-set, glittering eyes,
answered as simply: "I will, Sergeant!"

He declined an offer.  "_Nemoyah_!  (No) thanks, I've had enough."

For some unaccountable reason, Slavin smiled also.  His huge clamping
right hand crushed George's, while the left described an arc heavenwards.
Came a throaty gurgle, a careless swing of the arm, and--

  "Be lay loike a warrior takin' his rist,
  Wid his--

"I misrimimber th' tail-ind av ut," sighed Sergeant Slavin, "'Tis toime
we turned in."


In silence they re-entered the detachment.  Yorke, minus his moccasins,
fur-coat and red-serge, lay stretched out upon his cot sleeping heavily,
his flushed, reckless, high-bred face pillowed on one outflung arm.
Above him, silent guardians of his rest, his grotesque mixture of prints
gleamed duskily in the lamp-light.

Into Redmond's mind--sunk into a deep oblivion of dreamy, chaotic
thought--came again Slavin's words:

"Shtudy thim picthures, bhoy! an', by an' large ye have th' man himsilf"

Soon, too, he slept; and into his fitful slumbers drifted a ridiculously
disturbing dream.  That of actually witnessing the terrible scene of the
long-dead Indian Mutiny hero, Major Hodson, executing with his own hand
the three princes of Oude.

_Inshalla_! it was done--there! there! against the cart, amidst the
gorgeous setting of Indian sunset and gleaming minaret.  "Deen!  Deen!
Futteh _Mohammed_!" came a dying scream upon the last shot--the smoking
carbine was jerked back to the "recover"--a moment the scarlet-turbaned,
scarlet-sashed English officer gazed with ruthless satisfaction at his
treacherous victims then, turning sharply, faced him.

And lo! to Redmond it seemed that the stern, intolerant,
recklessly-handsome countenance he looked upon bore a striking
resemblance to the face of Yorke.




CHAPTER IV

  _Burn'd Marmion's swarthy cheek like fire,
  And shook his very frame for ire,
  And--"This to me!" he said,--_
                              MARMION


Early on the morrow it came to pass that Sergeant Slavin, cooking
breakfast for all hands, heard Yorke's voice uplifted in song, as that
worthy made his leisurely toilet.  He shot a slightly bilious glance at
Redmond, who, "Morning Stables" finished, lounged nearby.

"Hear um?" he snorted enviously.  "Singin'! singin'!--forever
singin'!--eyah! sich nonsince, tu."

But, to George, who possessed a musical ear, the ringing tenor sounded
rather airily and sweetly--

  "_Hark! hark! the lark at Heaven's Gate sings,
    And Phoebus 'gins arise,
  His steeds to water at those springs--_"

"Fwhat yez know 'bout that?"  Slavin forked viciously at the bacon he was
frying.  "Blarney my sowl! an' him not up for 'Shtables' at all! . . ."

  "_With ev'rything that pretty is:--
  My lady sweet, arise! arise!
  My lady sweet, arise!_"

"My lady shweet!"--Slavin snorted unutterable things.

Yawning, the object of his remarks sauntered into the kitchen just then,
and, deeming the occasion now to be a fitting one, the sergeant
introduced his two subordinates to each other.

Yorke, with a bleak nod and handshake, swept the junior constable with a
swiftly appraising glance.  As frigidly was his salutation returned.
Redmond remarked the regular features, suggestive rather of the ancient
Norman type, the thin, curved, defiant nostrils and dark, arching
eyebrows.  The face, with its indefinable stamp of birth and breeding was
handsome enough in its patrician mould, but marred somewhat by the lines
of cynicism, or dissipation, round the sombre, reckless eyes and
intolerant mouth.  He had a cool, clear voice and a whimsical,
devil-may-care sort of manner that was apparently natural to him, as was
also a certain languid grace of movement.  He possessed an irritating
mannerism of continually elevating his chin and dilating his curved
nostrils disdainfully in a sort of soundless sniff.  Beyond a slight
flush he showed little trace of his previous night's dissipation.

"Where do you hail from?" he enquired of George with casual interest over
the mess-table later.

"Ontario," replied George laconically, "my people are farmers down there."

For a moment Yorke's arched brows lifted in puzzled surprise--came a
repetition of his offensive sniffing mannerism; and he stared pointedly
away again.  It was difficult to be more insulting in dumb show.

George, mindful of his promise to Slavin, groaned inwardly.  "I am going
to hate this fellow" he thought.

The sergeant, from the head of the table, kept a keen watch upon the pair.

"An' fwhat?" came his soft brogue, by way of diversion, "an' fwhat made
yu' take on th' Force?"

"Oh, I don't know!"  Wearily, George shoved his hands deep into his
pockets and leant back in his chair.  "Old man's pretty well fixed--now.
He's a member of the legislature for ---- County.  I was at McGill for
some terms--medicine."  A hopeless note crept into his tones.  "I fell
down on my exams . . . ran amuck with the wrong bunch an' all
that--an'--an' . . .  kind of made a mess of things I guess. . . .  Went
broke--came West. . . .  That's why. . . ."

With a forlorn sort of forced grin he gazed back at his interlocutor.
Yorke, unheeding the conversation, continued his breakfast as if he were
alone.

"H-mm!" grunted Slavin, summing up the situation with native simplicity,
"That's ut, eh?--but, for all ye have th' spache an' manners av a
ginthleman--ranker somehow--somehow I misdoubt ye're a way-back waster
like Misther Yorkey here!"

That hardened "ginthleman," absently sipping his coffee, flung a
faintly-derisive, patient smile at his accuser.  A perfect understanding
seemed to exist between the two men.  Redmond, musing upon the
pathetically-sordid drama he had witnessed not so many hours since,
relapsed into a reverie of speculation.

The silence was suddenly broken by the sharp trill of the telephone.
Slavin arose lethargically from the mess-table and answered it.

"Hullo! yis!  Slavin shpeakin'!  Fwat?--all right Nick!  I'll sind a man
shortly an' vag um!  So long!  Oh, hold on, Nick! . . .  May th' divil
niver know ye're dead till ye're tu hours in Hivin!  Fwhat?--Oh, thank
yez!  Same tu yez!  Well! . . . so long!"

"Hobo worryin' Nick Lee at Cow Run.  Scared av fire in th'
livery-shtable.  Go yu', Yorkey!"  He eyed George a moment in curious
speculation.  "Yu' had betther go along tu, Ridmond!  Exercise yez harse
an'"--he lit his pipe noisily--"learn th' lay av th' thrails."  He turned
to the senior constable.  "If ye can lay hould av th' J.P. there, get
this shtiff committed an' let Ridmond take thrain wid um tu th' Post.
Yu' return wid th' harses!"

"Why can't Redmond nip down there on a way-freight and do the whole
thing?" said Yorke, a trifle sulkily.  "It seems rot sending two men
mounted for one blooming hobo."

"Eyah!" murmured Slavin with suspicious mildness, "'tis th' long toime
since I have used me shtripes tu give men undher me wan ordher twice."

Yorke flashed a slightly apprehensive glance at his superior's face.
Then, without another word, he reached for his side-arms, bridle, and
fur-coat.  He knew his man.

Redmond followed suit and they adjourned to the stable.

"I saw that beggar yesterday--on my way up," remarked George,
ill-advisedly.

Yorke stared.  "The hell you did! . . . why didn't you vag him then?" he
retorted irritably.

Bursting with silent wrath at the "choke-off," with difficulty Redmond
held his peace.  In silence they saddled up and leading the horses out
prepared to mount.  Yorke swung up on the splendid, mettled
black--"Parson."  He had an ideal cavalry seat, and as with an easy grace
he gently controlled his impatient horse, with an inscrutable, mask-like
countenance he watched Redmond and the sorrel "Fox."

With toe in the leather-covered stirrup the latter reached for the
saddle-horn.  Poor George! fuming inwardly over one humiliation caused
him shortly to be the recipient of another.  Too late to his preoccupied
mind came Slavin's warning of the day before.

Like a flash the sorrel whirled to the "off-side" and Redmond, swung off
his balance, revolved into space and was pitched on his hands and knees
in the snow.  Fortunately his foot had slipped clear of the stirrup.  In
this somewhat ignominious position dizzily he heard Yorke's mocking tones:

"What are the odds on Fox, bookie? . . .  I'd like a few of those dollars
when you've quite finished picking them all up."

With an almost superhuman effort the young fellow controlled himself once
more as he arose.  Not lightly had he given a promise.  Silently he
dusted the snow from his uniform and strode over to where the sorrel
awaited him.  The horse had made no attempt to run away; apparently being
an old hand at the game.  It now stood eying its dupe, with Lord knows
what mirth tickling its equine brain.

Slipping the "nigh" rein through the saddle-fork, then back to the
cheek-strap again, George snubbed Fox's head towards him, making it
impossible for the horse to whirl to the "off" as before.  Warily and
quietly he then swung into the saddle and the two men set off.

A few yards from the front of the detachment Yorke suddenly pulled up
and, dismounting, felt around in the snow at the base of a
well-remembered telephone-pole.  It was Redmond's hour to jeer now, if he
had been mindful to do so.  But another usurped that privilege.

A queer choking sound made them both turn round.  Slavin, his grim face
registering unholy mirth, lounged in the doorway.

"Fwhat ye lukkin for, Yorkey?"

"Oh, nothing!" came that gentleman's answer.

"Ye'll find ut in th' bottle thin."

Insult was added to injury by the sergeant casually plucking that article
from it's "rist" and chucking it over.

Yorke's face was a study.  "Oh!" cried he dismally, "what wit! . . . give
three rousing cheers!" . . .  He mounted once more.  "Well! there's no
denying you are one hell of a sergeant!"

That worthy one grinned at him tolerantly.  "Get yez gone!" he spat back,
"an' du not linger tu play craps on th' thrail either--th' tu av yez!"

Long and grimly, with his bald head sunk between his huge shoulders, he
gazed after the departing riders.  "Eyah! 'tis best so!" he murmured
softly, "a showdown--wid no ould shtiff av a non-com like meself tu butt
in. . . .  An', onless I am mistuk that same will come this very morn,
from th' luks av things. . . .  Sind th' young wan is as handy wid his
dhooks as Brankley sez he is! . . .  Thin--an' on'y thin will there be
peace in th' fam'ly."

He re-lit his pipe and, shading his eyes from the snow-glare focussed
them on two rapidly vanishing black specks.  "I wud that I cud see ut!"
he sighed, plaintively, "I wud that I cud see ut!"

It was a glorious day, sunny and clear, with the temperature sufficiently
low to prevent the hard-packed snow from balling up the horses' feet.
The trail ran fairly level along a lower shelf of the timber-lined
foothills, which on their right hand sloped gradually to the banks of the
Bow River in a series of rolling "downs."  Sharply outlined against the
blue ether the Sou' Western chain of the mighty "Rockies" reared their
rosily-white peaks in all their morning glory--silent guardians of the
winter landscape.

Deep down in his soul young Redmond harboured a silent, dreamy adoration
for the beauty of such scenes as this.  Under different conditions he
would have enjoyed this ride immensely.  But now--with his mind a
seething bitter chaos consequent upon his companion's incomprehensible
behavior towards him, he rode in a sort of brooding reverie.  Yorke was
equally morose.  Not a word had fallen from their lips since they left
the detachment.

Right under the horses' noses a big white jack-rabbit suddenly darted
across the snow-banked ruts of the well-worn trail, pursuing its leaping
erratic course towards a patch of brush on the river side.
Simultaneously the animals shied, with an inward trend, cannoning their
respective riders together.  Yorke reined away sharply and glared.

"Get over'" he said curtly, "don't crowd me!"

He spoke as a Cossack hetman might to his sotnia, and, at his tone and
attitude, something snapped within Redmond.  To his already overflowing
cup of resentment it was the last straw.  His promise to Slavin he flung
to the winds, and it was replaced with vindictive but cool purpose.

"Showdown!" he muttered under his breath, "I knew it had to come!"  He
was conscious of a feeling of vast relief.  Aloud he responded, blithely
and rudely, "Oh! to hell with _you_!"

Yorke checked his horse with a suddenness that brought the animal back
onto its haunches.  Sitting square and motionless in the saddle for a
moment he stared at George with an expression almost of shocked
amazement; then his face became convulsed with ruthless passion.

The junior constable had pulled up also, and now wheeling "half-left" and
lolling lazily in his saddle with shortened leg stared back at his enemy
with an expression there was no mistaking.  His debonair young face had
altered in an incredible fashion.  Although his lips were pursed up with
their whistling nonchalance his eyes had contracted beneath scowling
brows into mere pin-points of steel and ice.  He looked about as docile
as a young lobo wolf--cornered.

"Ah!" murmured Yorke, noting the transformation; and he seemed to
consider.  He had seen that look on men's faces before.  Insensibly,
passion had vanished from his face; the bully had disappeared; and in his
place there sat in saddle a cool, contemptuous gentleman.

"Are you talking back to me?" he said.  He did not look astounded
now--seemed rather to assume it.

Redmond's scowling brows lifted a fraction.  "Talking back?" he echoed,
"sure!  Who the devil do you think you're trying to come 'the Tin Man'
over?"

Reluctantly Yorke discounted his first impressions.  Here was no
self-conscious bravado.  Warily he surveyed George for a moment--the cool
appraising glance of the ring champion in his corner scanning his
challenger--then, swinging out of the saddle, he dropped his lines and
began to unbuckle his spurs.

There was no mistaking his actions.  Redmond followed suit.  A few
seconds he looked dubiously at his horse, then back at Yorke.

"Oh, you needn't be scared of Fox beating it," remarked that gentleman a
trifle wearily, "he'll stand as good as old Parson if you chuck his lines
down."

Shading his eyes from the sun-glare he took a rapid survey of their
surroundings, then led the way to a wind-swept patch of ground, more or
less bare of snow.  Arriving thither, as if by mutual consent they flung
off caps, side-arms, fur-coats and stable-jackets.  Yorke, a graceful,
compactly-built figure of a man, sized up his slightly heavier opponent
with an approving eye.

"You strip good" he said carelessly.  "Well! what's it to be? . . .
'muck' or 'muffin'?"

"'Muffin' of course!" snapped Redmond angrily, "what d'ye take me for?--a
'rough-house meal ticket'?"

"All right!" said Yorke soothingly, "don't lose your temper!"

It may have been a shrewdly-calculated attempt to attain that end; and
yet again it may have been only sheer mechanical habit that prompted him
to stretch forth his hands in the customary salute of the ring.

With an inarticulate exclamation of rage the younger man struck the
proffered hands aside and led with a straight left for the other's head.
Yorke blocked it cleverly and fell into a clinch.

"Ah!" murmured Yorke in his antagonist's ear with a sinister smile,
"rotten manners! for just that, my buck, I'll make you scoff 'muffin'
'till you're quite poorly!"

Working his arms cautiously, he sprang clear of the clinch, then, rushing
his man and feinting for the ribs, he rocked Redmond's head back with two
terrific left and right hooks to the jaw.

The jarring sting of the punches, although dazing him slightly, brought
Redmond to his senses, as he realized how vulnerable his momentary loss
of temper had rendered him.  He now braced himself with dogged
determination and, covering up warily, circled his adversary with clever
foot-work.  Yorke, tearing in again was met with one of the crudest jabs
he had ever known--flush in the mouth.  Gamely he retaliated with a
stinging uppercut and a right swing which, coming home on Redmond's
cheek-bone, whirled him off his balance and sent him sprawling.

Dazed, but not daunted, he scrambled to his feet.  Yorke, blowing upon
his knuckles with all the air of an old-time "Regency blood," waited with
heaving chest and scornful, narrowed eyes.

"Want to elevate the sponge?" he queried sneeringly.

"No!" panted George grimly, "it was you started the whole rotten dirty
business, and, by gum! I'll finish it!"

Dancing in and out he drew an ineffective left from his opponent and
countered with a pile-driving right to the heart.  Yorke gave vent to a
groaning exclamation and turned pale.  He spat gaspingly out of his
mashed lips and propped Redmond off awhile; then, suddenly springing in
again he attempted to mix it.  George was nothing loath, and the two men,
standing toe-to-toe, slugged each other with a perfect whirlwind of
damaging punches to face and body.

Even in the giddy whirl of combat, in either man's heart now was a wonder
almost akin to respect for each other's ring knowledge and gameness.  It
was not George's first bout by many, but the physical endurance of this
hard, clean-hitting Corinthian of a man was an astounding revelation to
him; the science of the graceful, narrow-waisted figure was still as
quick and as punishing as a steel trap.

Yorke, for his part, reflected with bitter irony how utterly erroneous
had been his primary calculations--how Nemesis was hard upon his heels at
last in the guise of this relentless youngster, who fought like a
college-bred "Charley Mitchell."

Ding! dong!--hook, jab, uppercut, block, and swing; in and out, back and
forth, side-stepping and head-work--one long exhausting round.  Flesh and
blood could not stand the pace--though it was Redmond now who forced it.
Neither of the men was in training and the long strain began to tell upon
them both cruelly--especially upon the veteran Yorke.  Still, with
frosted hair and streaming faces, the sweat-soaked, bruised and bleeding
combatants staggered against each other and strove to make play with
their weary arms, until utter exhaustion rang the time gong.

Gasping and swaying to and fro, his puffed lips wreathed into a ghastly
semblance of his old scornful smile, Yorke dropped his guard and stuck
out his chin.  He mouthed and pointed to it tauntingly.  In spite of
himself, a sorry grin flickered over George's battered, weary young face.
He mouthed back--speech was beyond either; sagging at the knees he reeled
forward and his right arm went poking out in a wobbling, uncertain punch.

It glanced harmlessly over Yorke's shoulder, but the violent impact of
his body sent the other heavily to the ground.  An ineffectual struggle
to maintain his equilibrium and he, too, fell--face downwards, with his
head pillowed on Yorke's heaving chest.




CHAPTER V

  We're poor little lambs who've lost our way,
      Baa!  Baa!  Baa!
  We're little black sheep who've gone astray,
      Baa--aa--aa!
  Gentlemen-rankers out on the spree,
  Damned from here to Eternity,
  God ha' mercy on such as we,
      Baa!  Yah!  Bah!
                    KIPLING


A great peace lay upon the frozen landscape--the deep, wintry peace of
the vast, snow-bound Nor'West.  A light breeze murmured over the crisping
snow, and moaned amongst the pines in the timber-lined spurs of the
foothills.  High overhead in the sunny, dazzling blue vault of heaven a
huge solitary hawk slowly circled with wide-spread, motionless wings,
uttering intermittently its querulous, eerie whistle.

Awhile the two exhausted men lay gasping for breath--absolutely and
utterly spent.  Suddenly Yorke shivered violently and sighed.  Redmond
raised himself off the prostrate form of his late opponent and,
staggering over to the pile of their discarded habiliments, slowly and
painfully he donned his fur coat and cap; then, picking up Yorke's, he
stumbled over to the latter.  The senior constable was now sitting up,
with arms drooping loosely over his knees.  George wrapped the coat
around the bowed shoulders and put on the cap.

"You're cold, old man!" he said simply.  "We'd best get our things on
now, and beat it."

Wearily Yorke raised his head, and, at something he beheld in that
disfigured, but unalterably-handsome face, Redmond's heart smote him.

Often in the past he had fondly imagined himself nursing implacable,
absolutely undying hatreds; brooding darkly over injuries received in
fancy or reality, planning dire and utterly ruthless revenge, etc.  But,
deep, deep down in his boyish soul he knew it to be only a dismal
failure--that he could not keep it up.  His was an impulsive, generous
young heart--equally quick to forgive an injury as to resent one.  Now in
his pity and misery he could have cried--to see his erstwhile enemy so
hopelessly broken in body and spirit.

Therefore it did not occur to him that it was sheer sentimental absurdity
on his part now to drop on one knee and put his arms around that
shivering, pride-broken form.

"Yorkey!" he mumbled huskily, "old man! . . .  Yor--"

He choked a bit, and was silent.

Waveringly, a skinned-knuckled, but sinewy, shapely hand crept out and
gently ruffled Redmond's curly auburn hair.  Vaguely he heard a voice
speaking to him.  Could that tired, kind, whimsical voice belong to
Yorke?  It said: "Reddy, my old son! . . . we're still in the ring,
anyway. . . .  Seems--do what we would or could--we couldn't poke each
other out. . . ."

Came a long silence; then: "If ever a man was sorry for the rotten way
he's acted, it's surely me right now. . . .  Got d----d good cause to be
p'raps. . . .  I handed it to you about the sponge . . . egad!  I
well-nigh came chucking it up myself--later.  My colonial oath! but
you're the cleverest, gamest, hardest-hitting young proposition I've ever
ruffled it out with! . . .  Where'd you pick it up?  Who's handled you?"

George slowly rose to his feet.  "Man named Scholes--down East" he
answered.  He eyed Yorke's face ruefully and, incidentally felt his own,
"I used to do a bit with the gloves when I was at McGill.  Talking about
sponges!--I only wish we had one now to chuck up--in tangible form."

He abstracted the other's handkerchief and, rolling it with his own into
a pad dabbed it in the snow.  Yorke winced.  "Hold still, old thing!"
said Redmond, "we'll have to clean off a bit ere we hit the giddy trail
again."

For some minutes he gently manipulated the pad.  "There! you don't look
too bad now.  Have a go at me!"

Figuratively, they licked each other's wounds awhile.  Yorke had grown
very silent.  Chin in hands and rocking very slightly to and fro, all
huddled up in his fur coat, he gazed unseeingly into the beyond.  His
face was clouded with such hopeless, bitter, brooding misery that it
worried Redmond.  He guessed it to be something far deeper than the
memory of their recent conflict.  He strove to arouse the other.

"Talk about game cocks!" he began lightly.  "Ten years ago, say! you must
have been a corker--regular 'Terry McGovern'."

"Eh?"  Yorke's far-away eyes stared at him vaguely.  "I was in India
then.  Army light-weight champion in my day.  Slavin wasn't joshing much
at breakfast, by gum! . . .  Now we're here! . . .  We're a bright pair!"
He made as though to cast snow upon his head, "Ichabod!  Ichabod! our
glory has departed!"

He lifted up his tenor voice, chanting the while he rocked--

  "_Gentlemen-rankers out on the spree,
  Damned from here to Eternity,
  God ha' mercy on such as we,
      Baa!  Yah!  Bah!_"

Redmond flinched and raised a weakly protesting hand.  "Don't, old man!"
he implored miserably, "don't! what's the--"

"Eh!" queried Yorke brutally--rocking--"does hurt?"

  "_If the home we never write to, and the oaths we never keep,
  And all we--_"

"No! no! no!  Yorkey!" George's voice rose to a cry, "not that! . . .
quit it, old man! . . . that's one of the most terrible things Kipling
ever wrote--terrible because it's so absolutely, utterly hopeless. . . ."

"Well, then!" said Yorke slowly--

  "_Can you blame us if we soak ourselves in beer?_"

"It wasn't beer," muttered Redmond absently, "it was whiskey.  Slavic and
I drank it."  With an effort he strove to arouse himself out of the
despondency that he himself had fallen into.

"Listen! . . .  Oh! quit that d----d rocking, Yorkey! . . .  Listen now!
we've put up a mighty good scrap against each other--we'll call that a
draw--let's put up another against our--well! we'll call it our rotten
luck . . .  D----n it all, old man, we're not 'down an' outs' doing duty
in this outfit--the best military police corps in the world! . . .  Let's
both of us quit squalling this eternal 'nobody loves me' stuff!  This
isn't any slobbery brotherly love or New Jerusalem business, or anything
like that, either.  I'm not a bloomin' missionary!"  He qualified that
assertion unnecessarily to prove it.  "But let's stick together and back
each other up--just us two and old man Slavin--make it a sort of 'rule of
three.'  We can have a deuce of a good time on this detachment
then! . . ."

He spoke hotly, eagerly, with boyish fervour, his soul in his eyes.

Yorke remained silent, with averted eyes.  That imploring, wistful,
bruised young countenance was almost more than he could stand.  George,
dropping on one knee beside him put a tremulous hand on the senior
constable's shoulder.  "What's wrong, Yorkey?" he queried.  He shook the
bowed shoulder gently.  "What's made you consistently knock every third
buck that's been sent here? 'till they got fed up, and transferred? . . .
They tried to put the wind up me about it at the Post.  What's bitin'
you?  I don't seem to get your angle at all!"

"Oh, I don't know!"  Yorke coughed and spat drearily.  "Kind of rum
reason, you'll think.  Long story--too long--dates back.  Listen then!
Ten years back, in the pride of my giddy youth, I held a Junior Sub's
commission in the ---- Lancers--in India.  This is just a synopsis of
my case, mind! . . .  Well! the regiment was lying at Rawal Pindi, and--I
guess I kind of ran amuck there--got myself into a rotten
_esclandre_--entirely my own fault I'll admit:

  _Man is fire, and Woman is tow,
  And the Devil, he comes and begins to blow--_

the same old miserable business the world's fed up with.  Since then
seems I've kind of made a mess of things.  Burke Slavin's about
right--his estimate of me."  He sighed with bitter, gloomy retrospection.
"I've always had a queer, intolerant sort of temperament.  If I'd lived
in the days of the Indian Mutiny I guess I'd have been in 'Hodson's
Horse'."  (Redmond started, remembering his curious dream.)  "He was a
man after my own heart," Yorke continued slowly, "resourceful, slashing
sort of beggar . . . he ruffled it with a high hand.  Bold and game as
Sherman, or Paul Jones, but as ruthless as Graham of Claverhouse.  He put
the ever-lasting fear into the rebels of Oude--something like Cromwell
did in Ireland.  My old Governor served through the Mutiny--he's told me
stories of him.  My God!"

He drew his fur coat closer round him.  "Well!"--Redmond watched the
sombre profile--"as I was saying . . .  I 'muckered'. . . .  Since then,
with the years, I guess I've been climbing down the ladder of illusions
till I'm right in the stoke-hole, and Old Nick seems to grin and whisper:
'As you were! my cashiered Sub.--As you were!' every time I chuck a brace
and try to climb up again.  How's that for a bit of cheap cynicism?"--the
low, bitter laugh was not good to hear--"Man!"--the brooding eyes
narrowed--"I've sure plumbed the depths--knocking around, with the right
to live.  Port Said, Buenos Aires, Shanghai. . . .  I've certainly
travelled.  Some day I'll throw the book at you.  Now--substance and
ambition gone by the board long ago, and mighty little left of principle
I guess--I am--what I am--everything except a prodigal, or a
remittance-man--I never worried them at Home--that way. . . ."

He spoke with a sort of reckless earnestness that moved his hearer more
than that individual cared to show.  Redmond felt it was useless to offer
mere conventional sympathy in a case like this.  He did the next best
thing possible--he remained silently attentive and let the other run on.

"You take three men now--stationed in the same detachment," resumed Yorke
wearily, "by gum! they're thrown together mighty close when you come to
think of it.  It's different to the Post, where there's a crowd.  Life's
too short to start in explaining minutely just what that difference is.
Fact remains! . . . to get along and pull together they've got to like
each other--have something in common--give and take.  Otherwise the
situation becomes d----d trying, and trouble soon starts in the family."

"By what divine right I should consider myself qualified to--to--Oh! shut
up, you young idiot! . . ."  Redmond, forehead pressed into the speaker's
shoulder, giggled hysterically in spite of himself--"Shut up! d'you hear?
or I'll knock your silly block off!"

The two bodies shook, with their convulsive merriment.  "You can't do it!
old thing," came George's smothered rejoinder, "and you know darned well
you can't--now! . . .  Go on, you bloomin' Hodson!--proceed!"

Yorke gave vent to a good-natured oath.  "Hodson? . . . you do me proud,
my buck! . . .  Well now!--this 'three men in a boat' business! . . .
I'll admit I 'rocked' it with Crampton.  I virtually abolished him
because--oh! I couldn't stick the beggar at all.  I simply couldn't make
a pal of him.  He was fairly good at police work, but a proper cad, in my
opinion.  Always swanking about the palatial residence he'd left behind
in the Old Country.  He called it ''is 'ome' at that.  Typical specimen
of the middle-class snob.  Followed Taylor.  Thick-headed, serious-minded
sort of fool.  Had great veneration for 'his juty.'  No real knowledge of
the Criminal Code, and minus common sense, yet begad! the silly beggar
tried to be more regimental that the blooming Force is itself.  I
systematically put the wind up to him 'till he got cold feet and quit."

Redmond recalled the fact that Taylor had been his predecessor.
"Followed!" he echoed mockingly, looking up at his handiwork.

Yorke, with a twisted smile glanced down at the bruised, but debonair
young face.  Benevolently he punched its owner in the back.
"Followed . . . a certain young fellow, yclept 'Nemesis'," he said, "I
sized you up for one of these smart Alecks--first crack out of the box,
and egad! I think I'm about right."

Said Redmond, "How about our respected sergeant? we seem to have
forgotten him."

"Slavin?" ejaculated the senior constable; and was silent awhile.  There
was no levity in him now.  Slowly he resumed, "I guess as much as it's
humanly possible for two men to know each other--down to the bedrock,
it's surely Burke Slavin and I.  Should too, the years we've been
together.  The good old beggar! . . .  We slang each other, and all
that . . . but there's too much between us ever to resent anything for
long."

"I know," said Redmond simply, "he told me himself--last night."

"Eh?" queried Yorke sharply.  "My God! . . .  Tchkk!" he clucked, and
burying his hands in his face he gave vent to a fretful oath.  "My God!"
he repeated miserably, "I'd forgotten--last night! . . .  I sure must
have been 'lit' . . . to come that over old Burke. . . ."

"You sure were!" remarked Redmond brutally.

"Keats' 'St. Agnes' Eve'! . . .  Oh, Lord!" . . .  He drew in his breath
with a sibilant hiss, "There seems something--something devilish about--"

"I know!  I know!" breathed Yorke tensely, "what . . . you mean."  His
haggard eyes implored Redmond's.  "No! no! never again . . .  I swear
it. . . ."

There came a long, painful silence.  "See here; look!" began Yorke
suddenly.  He stopped and surveyed George, a trifle anxiously.
"Mind! . . . I'm not trying to justify myself but--get me right about
this now.  Don't you ever start in making a mistake about Slavin--blarney
and all.  No, Sir!  I tell you when old Burke runs _amôk_ in those
tantrums he's a holy fright.  He'd kill a man.  Might as well run up
against a gorilla."

A vision of the huge, sinister, crouching figure seemed to rise up in
Redmond's mind--the great, clutching, _simian_ hands.

"In India," continued Yorke, "we'd say he'd got a touch of the 'Dulalli
Tap.'  The man doesn't know his own strength.  I was taking an awful
chance--getting his goat like that last night.  It's a wonder he didn't
kill me.  He's man-handled me pretty badly at times.  Oh, well!  I guess
it's been coming to me all right.  Neither of us has ever dreamt of going
squalling to the Orderly-room over our . . . differences.  I don't think
Burke's ever taken the trouble to 'peg' a man in his life.  Not his way.
'I must take shteps!' says he, and 'I will take shteps!' and when he
starts in softly rubbing those awful great grub-hooks he calls
hands--together! . . . well! you want to look out."

Lighting a cigarette he resumed reminiscently: "They were a tough crowd
to handle up in the Yukon.  The devil himself 'd have been scared to butt
in to that 'Soapy Smith' gang; but, by gum! they were afraid of Slavin.
He doesn't drink much now, but he did then--mighty few that didn't--up
there--and I tell you, even our own fellows got a bit leery of him when
he used to start in 'trailing his coat.'  They were glad when he 'came
outside.'  That's one of the reasons why he's shoved out on a prairie
detachment.  He wouldn't do at all for the Post.  He never reports in
there more than he has to--dead scared of the old man, who's about the
only soul he is afraid of on earth.  The O.C.'s awful sarcastic with him
at times, and that gets Burke's goat properly.  He sure does hate getting
a choke-off from the old man."

He grinned guiltily.  "That's why he prefers to wash the family linen
strictly at home--what little there is.  But, sarcasm and all, the O.C.
gives him credit for being onto his job--and it's coming to him, too.
He's quick acting and he's got the Criminal Code well-nigh by heart.
Regular blood-hound when he starts in working up a case."

He yawned, and rising stiffly to his feet stretched his cramped limbs.
"We-ll!  Reddy, my giddy young hopeful!--Now we've fallen on each other's
ruddy necks and kissed and wept and had a heart-to-heart talk we'll--"

"Aw, quit making game, Yorkey!  Is it a go?  You know what I said?"

Strangely compelling, Yorke found that bruised, eager, wistful young
face, with its earnest, honest eyes.  "All right!" he agreed, with
languid bonhomie.  "You've certainly earned the office of Dictator, and,
as I remarked--we really have quite a lot in common.  Mind, though, you
don't repent of your bargain.  One thing!" the curved, defiant nostrils
dilated faintly, "Seems the world always has use for us runagates in one
capacity.  It's just the likes of us that compose the rank and file of
most of the Empire's military police forces.  Who makes the best M.P.
man, executing duty, say, in a critical life-and-death hazard?  The
cautious, upright, model young man, with a tender regard for a whole skin
and a Glorious Future?  Or the poor devil who's lost all, and doesn't
care a d----n?  We tackle the world's dangerous, dirty criminal work
and--swank and all--Society don't want to forget it."

He pointed to their horses who were playfully rearing and biting at each
other in equine sport.  "Look at old Parson and Fox tryin' to warm
themselves?  Bloomin' fine example we've set 'em.  Well! _allons_! _mon
camarade_, let's up and beat it."




CHAPTER VI

  _A deed accursed!  Strokes have been struck before
    By the assassin's hand, whereof men doubt
  If more of horror or disgrace they bore;
    But this foul crime, like Cain's, stands darkly out._
                                        THOMAS TAYLOR


Hastily dressing, the two policemen mounted and took the trail once more.
Side by side as they rode along, in each man's heart was an estimate of
the other vastly different from that with which they started out that
memorable morning.

Yorke, his spirits now fully recovered, became quite companionably
communicative, relating picturesque, racy stories of India, the Yukon,
and other countries he had known.  George, in receptive mood, listened in
silent appreciation to one of the most fascinating _raconteurs_ he had
ever met in his young life.  Incidentally he felt relieved as he noted
his comrade now tactfully avoiding morbid egotism--dwelling but lightly
upon the milestones that marked his chequered career.

The bodily stiffness and soreness, consequent upon their recent bout, was
now well-nigh forgotten, though occasionally they laughingly rallied each
other as the sharp air stung their bruised faces.  They were just
surmounting the summit of a long, steep grade in the trail.

Said Redmond dubiously: "See here; look!  I'm darned if I like getting
the freedom of the City of Cow Run sportin' such a pretty mug as this!
How many more miles to this giddy burg, old thing?"

Yorke grinned unfeelingly.  "Hard on nine miles to go yet.  We're about
half way.  _Isch ga bibble_! . . . open your ditty-box and sing! you
blooming whip-poor-will."

  "A werry heart goes all the way,
  But a sad one tires in a mile a';
  A--"

The old lilt died on his lips.  With a startled oath he reined in sharply
and, shielding his eyes from the sun-glare, remained staring straight in
front of him.  They had just topped the crest of the rise.  The eastward
slope showed a low-lying, undulating stretch of snow-bound country,
sparsely dotted with clumps of poplar and alder growth, through which the
trail wound snake-like into the fainter distance.  Southwards, below the
rolling, shelving benches, lay the river, a steaming black line, twisting
interminably between frosty, bush-fringed banks.

No less startled than his companion, Redmond pulled up also and stared
with him.  Not far distant on the trail ahead of them they beheld a dark,
ominous-looking mass, vividly conspicuous against the snow.  Suddenly the
object moved and resolved itself unmistakably into a horse struggling to
rise.  For an instant they saw the head and the fore-part of the body
lift, and then flop prone again.  Close against it lay another dark
object.

"Horse down!" snapped Yorke tersely.  "Hell!" he added, "looks like a man
there, too! come on quick!"

Responding to a shake of the lines and a fierce thrust of the spurs,
their horses leapt forward and they raced towards their objective.

"Steady! steady!" hissed Yorke, checking his mount as they drew near the
fallen animal and its rider, "pull Fox a bit, Red!  Mustn't scare the
horse!"

Slackening into a walk, they flung out of saddle, dropped their lines,
crouched, and crept warily forward.  The horse, a big, splendid
seal-brown animal, had fallen on its right side, with its off fore-leg
plunged deep in a snow-filled badger-hole.  The body of the man lay also
on the off-side with one leg under his mount.  The stiffened form was a
ghastly object to behold, being literally encased in an armour-like shell
of frozen, claret-coloured snow.

At the approach of the would-be rescuers the poor brute whinnied
pitifully and made another ineffectual attempt to rise.  Yorke flung
himself onto the head and held it down, while George dived frantically
for the man's body, and tugged until he had got the leg from under.

"Hung up! by God!" gasped the former, "his foot's well-nigh through the
stirrup!"

Redmond, ex-medical student, made swift examination.  "Dead!" he
pronounced with finality, "Good God! dead as a herring!  The man's been
dragged and kicked to death!"  He made a futile effort to release the
imprisoned foot.

"No! no!" cried Yorke sharply, "no use doing that if he's dead.
Coroner's got to view things as they are."

The horse began to struggle again painfully.  Peering down the
badger-hole they could see the broken bone of its leg protruding bloodily
through the skin.  Yorke released one hand and reached for his gun.

"Poor old chap!" he said, "we'll fix you.  Quick Red! pull the body as
far back as the stirrup-legadeiro'll go!  That'll do!  There, old
boy! . . ."

And with practised hand he sent a merciful bullet crashing through brain
and spinal cord.  The hind legs threshed awhile, but presently, with a
muscular quiver they stiffened and all was still.  Yorke, releasing his
hold struggled to his feet, and the two men stared pityingly at what lay
before them.  What those merciless, steel-shod hoofs had left of the head
and the youthful body indicated a man somewhere in his twenties.  His
ice-bound outer clothing consisted of black Angora goatskin chaps and a
short sheepskin coat.

"Can't place him--like this," muttered Yorke, after prolonged scrutiny,
"but I seem to know the horse."

Suddenly he uttered a sharp exclamation--something between a groan and a
cry.  Redmond, startled at a new horror apparent on the other's ghastly
face, clutched him by the arm.

"What's up?" he queried tensely.

Yorke struggled to speak.  "Fox!" he gasped presently--"this
morning. . . .  I never told you.  My God!--You might have got hung up
like this, too."

"No! no!  Yorkey!" Redmond almost shouted the disclaimer, "Slavin wised
me up to that trick of his yesterday.  I forgot.  It was my own fault I
got piled like that.  Forget it, old man!  I say forget it!"

He shook the other's arm with a sort of savage gentleness.

A look of vague relief dawned on Yorke's haggard face.  "Ay, so!" he
murmured, and paused with brooding indecision.  "That's absolved my
conscience some, but not altogether."

They remained silent awhile after this.  Presently Yorke pulled
himself together and spoke briskly and decisively.  "Well, now! we'll
have to get busy.  Blair's place is only about three miles from
here--nor'east--they're on the long-distance 'phone.  Doctor Cox of Cow
Run's the coroner for this district.  If I can get hold of him I'll get
him to come out right-away--and I'll notify Slavin."

Catching up his horse he swung into the saddle.  "I'll be back here on
the jump.  You stick around, and say, Reddy, you might as well have a
dekko at the lay of things while you're waiting.  Where he came off the
perch, how far he's been dragged, and all that.  Be careful though, keep
well to the side and don't foul up the tracks.  And don't get too far
away, either!"

He galloped off and soon disappeared over a distant rise.  Left to
himself George mounted Fox and set to work to follow out the senior
constable's instructions.


"Well?" queried Yorke, swinging wearily out of his saddle an hour or so
later, "How'd you make out?  Find the place where he flopped?  Rum sort
of perch you've got there--you look like Patience on a monument!"

George, seated upon the rump of the dead horse, nodded and grunted
laconic response: "Sure.  'Bout two miles down the trail there.  How'd
you get along, Yorkey?  Did you raise Slavin and the coroner?"

"Got Slavin all hunkadory," said the senior constable briefly, "he should
be here soon, now.  Dr. Cox'd just left for Wilson's, two miles this side
of Cow Run.  They're on the 'phone, too; so I left word there for him to
come on here right away."  He seated himself alongside the other.

Awhile they carried on a desultory, more or less speculative conversation
anent the fatality, until they grew morbidly weary of contemplating the
poor broken body.  Yorke slid off the dead horse suddenly.

"Wish Slavin were here!" he said, "let's take a dekko from the top of the
rise, Reddy, see'f we can see him coming.  I'm getting cold sitting here."

Redmond, nothing loath, complied.  Mounting, they turned back to the
summit of the ridge.  Reaching it, the jingle of bells smote their ears,
and they espied the Police cutter approaching them at a rapid pace.

"Like unto Jehu, the son of Nimshi!" murmured Yorke, "he's sure springing
old T and B up the grade."

Sergeant Slavin pulled up his smoking team along-side his two mounted
subordinates.  "So ho, bhoys!" was his greeting, "fwhat's this bizness?"

Yorke rapidly acquainted him with all the details.  At one point in his
narration he had occasion to turn to George: "That's how it was, Reddy?"
And the latter replied, "That's about the lay of it, Yorkey."

The sergeant listened, but absently.  To them it did not seem exactly to
be an occasion for levity; but they could have sworn that, behind an
exaggerated grimness of mien, he was striving to suppress some inward
mirth, as his deep-set Irish eyes roved from face to face.

"Yez luk as if yez had been hung up an' dhragged tu--th' pair av yez," he
remarked casually.

Remembrance smote the two culprits.  They exchanged guilty glances and
swallowed the home-thrust in silence.

Slavin clucked to his team.  "Walk-_march_, thin!" said he.

Wheeling sharply about, they started down the trail again, the cutter
following in their wake.  If their consciences would have permitted them
to glance back they would have remarked their superior's face registering
unholy delight.

Out of the corner of his mouth Redmond shot, tensely, "Dye think he--"

"Oh!" broke in Yorke resignedly, sotto voce.  "You can't fool him! . . .
_Isch ga bibble_, anyway!"

"Yorkey!" an' "Reddy!" that worthy was mumbling tu himself--over and over
again, "_Yorkey_!" an' "_Reddy_!"  "'Tis so they name each other--now!
Blarney me sowl!  'Tis come about!  Fifty-fifty, tu--from th' mugs av
thim.  Peace, perfect peace, in th' fam'ly at last!  Eyah!  I wud have
given me month's pay-cheque for a ring-side seat."  He sighed deeply.

They reached the fatal spot.  Slavin, his levity gone, stepped out of the
cutter and, retaining the lines of his restive team, stared long at the
gruesome spectacle before him, with a sort of callous sadness.

"These tu must have lain here th' night," he remarked, indicating the
frost-rimed forms, "have yez sized things up?  Got th' lay av fwhere ut
happened?"

Redmond made affirmative response.

"Can you place him, Sergeant?" queried Yorke.

"Eyah!  Onless I am vastly mishtuk.  Whoa, now! shtand still, ye fules!
Fwhat yez a-scared av?  Here, Yorkey! hold T an' B a minnut!"

He pushed over his lines to the latter and, producing a pair of
leather-cased brand-inspector's clippers, he cropped bare a circular
patch on the defunct horse's nigh shoulder.  Shorn of the thick,
seal-brown winter hair, the brand was now plainly visible.  Enlightenment
came to Yorke in a flash, as he peered over his superior's shoulder.

"D Two!" he gasped, "I knew I'd seen that horse somewhere!  It's
'Duster,' Larry Blake's horse.  Tchkk! this must be him.  My God!"

"Shure!" snapped Slavin testily.  "Wake up!  Is yeh're mem'ry goin', man?
One av yeh're own cases last month, tu!"  He tenderly pocketed the
clippers.  "Yes! ye shud know him!"--dryly--"lukked troo th' bottom av a
glass wid him often enough."

"Let's see'f he's got any letters or anything in his pockets--to make
sure!" began Redmond eagerly.  Suiting the action to the word he bent
down to investigate.  But Slavin intruded a huge arm.  "Hould on, bhoy!"
he said, with all an old policeman's fussiness over rightful procedure.
"Du not touch!  That is th' coroner's bizness.  Did they not dhrill that
inta yeh at Regina?"

He stared thoughtfully at the corpse.  "Dhrink an' th' divil! eyah!
dhrink an' th' divil!"--sadly.  "Larry, me pore bhoy! niver more will ye
come a-whoopin' ut out av Cow Run on yeh 'Duster' horse . . .
shpiflicated belike an' singin' 'Th' Brisk Young Man."  Austerely he
glanced at Yorke, "'Tis a curse, this same dhrink!"

"How do you know the poor beggar was drunk?" queried the latter, a trifle
sulkily.  "He may have been as sober as you or I."

"Shpeak for yehsilf!" retorted Slavin dryly, "Ah! this must be Docthor
Cox comin' now!"

A cutter containing two men was approaching them rapidly.  Presently it
drew up alongside the group and a short, rotund gentleman, clad in furs,
sprang out and came swiftly, bag in hand.  He was middle-aged, with a
gray moustache and kind, alert, dark eyes.  Greeting the policemen
quietly, he turned to the broken body.

"Tchkk! good God!"  He shook his head sadly.  Redmond thought he had
never seen a medical man so unprofessionally shocked.  Presently he
straightened up and turned to Slavin.  "Can you identify him, Sergeant?"

That worthy nodded.  "Eyah! 'tis Larry Blake, I'm thinking Docthor.  Best
frisk him now an' see, I guess.  Maybe he has letthers."

Hastily diving into his bag the coroner produced a pair of long keen
scissors and slit the short, frozen sheepskin coat.  In the breast-pocket
of the coat underneath, amongst other miscellany two old letters rewarded
his search.  He glanced at the superscriptions and handed them up to
Slavin.

"Larry Blake it is," he said.  He felt the soggy, pulped head.  "Skull's
stove right in.  Any one of these smashes would have sufficed to kill
him."  He clipped the hair around a ghastly gaping crevice at the base of
the head.

Suddenly he peered closely, uttered an exclamation, peered again and drew
back.  "Sergeant!" he said sharply, "D'ye see that?--No need to ask you
what that is!"  In an unbroken portion of the back of the skull he
indicated a small, circular orifice.  The trio craned forward and made
minute examination.  Slavin ejaculated an oath and glanced up at
Yorke--almost remorsefully.

"I take ut all back," he said.  Meeting the coroner's blank, enquiring
stare he added: "Booze, Docthor--we thought ut might be. . . .  Yeh know
Larry!"

The physician of Cow Run nodded understandingly.  Slavin bent again and
made close scrutiny of the bullet-hole.  "_Back_ av th' head, no powdher
marks!"  He straightened up.  "Docther, are ye thru?  All right, thin!
Guess we'll book up an' start in."

Methodically they all produced note-books and entered the needful
particulars.  The lanky individual who had driven the coroner out brought
forward a tarpaulin and spread it on the ground.  With some difficulty
the over-shoed foot was disengaged from the imprisoning stirrup, the body
rolled in the tarpaulin and deposited in the rear of the doctor's cutter.
The saddle and bridle were flung into the Police cutter.  They then
rolled the dead horse clear of the trail.

That night the coyotes held grim, snarling carnival.

Slavin turned to Redmond.  "Ye've located th' place, eh?"  The latter
nodded.  "All right, thin, get mounted, th' tu av yez, an' lead on!"

Keeping needfully wide of the broad, claret-bespotted swath in the snow,
the party started trailing back.  Yorke and George rode ahead.  The
latter glanced around to make sure of being out of earshot of their
sergeant.

"We-ll of all the hardened old cases! . . .  Slavin sure does crown 'em!"
he muttered to his comrade.

"Hardened!"  Yorke laughed grimly.  "You should have seen him up in the
Yukon!  The man's been handling these rotten morgue cases 'till he'd
qualify for the Seine River Police.  He's got so he ascribes well-nigh
everything now to 'dhrink an' th' divil.'"  His face softened, "but I
know the real heart of old Burke under it all."

About two miles down the trail Redmond halted.

"Here it is!" he said.  And he indicated an irregular, blood-soaked,
clawed-up patch in the snow where the sanguinary swath ended.  They
dismounted.  Slavin drawing up alongside the coroner's cutter handed over
his lines to the teamster.

"Now!" said he, "let's shtart in! . . .  Ye must have 'shpotted this on
yeh way up, Docthor?"  He pointed to the patch.

The latter nodded.  "Yes! we thought it must have happened here."

For some few seconds, with one accord the party stared about them at
their surroundings.  The frozen landscape at this point presented a
singularly lonely, desolate aspect.  Flat, and for the greater part
absolutely bare of brush; save where from a small coulee some half mile
to the left of the trail the tops of a cotton-wood clump were visible.
Far to the right-hand, more than a mile away, stretched the first of the
shelving benches, where the high ground sloped away in irregular jumps,
as it were, to the river.

"Best ye shtay fwhere ye all are," cautioned the sergeant, "'till I size
up th' lay av things a bit.  I du not want th' thracks fouled up.  H-mm!
let's see now!"  He remained in deep, thoughtful silence a space.
"Thravellin' towards us," he muttered--"th' back av th' head!"

Hands clasped behind bent back, and with head thrust loweringly forward
from between his huge shoulders he paced slowly down the trail for some
hundred yards.  That grim, intent face and the swaying gait reminded
Redmond of some huge bloodhound casting about for a scent.

Halting irresolutely a moment, Slavin presently faced about and returned.
"Wan harse on'y!" he vouchsafed to their silent looks of enquiry.  "He
had not company.  Must have been shot from lift or right av th' thrail."
He stared around him at the bare sweep of ground.  "Now fwhere cud any
livin' man find cover here in th' full av th' moon, tu get th' range wid
a small arm?  He wud show up agin' th' snow like th' ace av shpades an'
he thried."

Suddenly his jaw dropped and he stiffened.  "Ah-hh!" His eyes rivetted
themselves on some object and his huge arm shot out.  "Fwhat's yon?"

They all stared in the direction he indicated.  Plastered with frosted
snow, until it was all but undiscernible against its white background,
lay an enormous boulder--a relic, perchance, of some vast pre-historic
upheaval.  It was situated at an oblique angle to the trail, about a
hundred yards distant.

With stealthy, quickened steps Slavin made his way towards it.  Tensely
they watched him.  In each man's mind now was a vague feeling of
certainty of something, they knew not what.  They saw him reach the
boulder, walk round it and stoop, peering at its base for a few moments.
Then suddenly he straightened up and beckoned to them.

"Thread in file," he called out warningly.  Yorke led, and, treading
heedfully in each other's foot-marks, they reached the spot.  Slavin
silently pointed downwards.  There, plainly discernible on the surface of
the wind-packed, hard-crusted snow, were the corrugated imprints of
overshoed feet--coming and going apparently in the direction of the
previously mentioned coulee.

Redmond indicated two rounded impressions at the foot of the boulder,
with two smaller ones behind.  "Must have hunched himself on his knees
behind, eh?" he queried in a low voice.

Slavin nodded.  The rays of the westering sun coming from back of a cloud
glinted on something in the snow, a few feet away from the tracks.  It
caught Yorke's eyes and with an exclamation he picked it up.

  "_--gold, raw gold, the spent shell rolled--_"

he quoted.  "Here you are, Burke!"

Slavin uttered a delighted oath as he examined the small, bottle-necked
shell of the automatic variety.  ".38 Luger!" he said.  "A high-pressure
'gat' like that is oncommon hereabouts!"  Passing it on to the coroner he
whistled softly.  "My God!  Fwhativer sort av a gun-artist is ut
that--even allowin' for th' moonlight--can pick a man off thru' th' head
wid a revolver at this distance? . . . an' wan shell on'y? . . .  'Soapy
Smith' himself cu'dn't have beat this!"

He proceeded to sift some fine, crisp snow in one of the imprints, then,
producing an old letter from his pocket, he flattened out the
type-written sheets of foolscap therein.  Placing the blank side of the
sheet face-downwards upon the imprint he pressed down smartly.  The
result was a very fair impression of the footmark, which he immediately
outlined in pencil.

A strange ominous silence fell upon the group.  Deep in wild, whirling
conjecture, each man gazed about him.  The desolate, sinister aspect of
their surroundings struck them with a sudden chill.  Yorke voiced the
general sentiment.

"My God!" he said in a low voice, "but it sure is dreary!"

With a final, self-satisfying survey at his "lay av things" Slavin
stepped well to the side of the incriminating foot-prints.  "Come on!" he
said "get in file behint me!  We will follow this up!"

Silently they obeyed and padded in his rear.

"D----d big feet, whoever owns 'em," remarked Redmond to Yorke.

Slavin heard him.  "Ay!" he flung back grimly.  "An' they will shtand on
th' dhrop yet--thim same feet!"

The tracks returning in the direction of the coulee presented a vast
contrast to the approaching imprints.  Where the latter denoted an even,
steady stride, the former ran in queer, irregular fashion--sometimes
bunched together, and at others with wide spaces between.

"'On th' double!'" remarked Slavin observantly.

"Must have got scairt!"

"Ah!" murmured the coroner, reflectively, "though the Bible doesn't
expressly state so, I guess Cain, too, got on the 'double' as you call
it--after he killed Abel."

They finally reached the coulee where the tracks, debouching from the
steep edge, passed along its rim and presently descended the more shallow
end of the draw.  Their leader eventually halted at the foot of a small
cotton-wood tree where the human foot-prints ended.  There in the snow
they beheld a hoof-trampled space, which, together with broken twigs,
indicated a tethered horse.

This served for comment and speculation awhile.

The sergeant, producing a small tape measure dotted down careful
measurements of the over-shoed imprints and their length of stride, also
the size of the shod hoof-marks.

Redmond drew his attention to blood-stains in several of the latter.
"Shod with 'never-slip' calks, Sergeant!" he said.  "Must have slipped
somewhere and 'calked' himself on the 'coronet,' I guess?"

"Eyah!" muttered Slavin approvingly, "Th' 'nigh-hind' 'tis, note,
bhoy! . . . 't'will serve good thrailin' that.  Well, let's follow ut on!"

Wearily his companions plodded on in his wake.  The tracks, after
following the draw for a short distance, suddenly wound up a steep,
narrow path on the left side of the coulee.  Reaching the surface of the
level ground, they circled until they struck into the main trail east
again, about a mile below where the party had left their horses.  Here,
merged amongst countless others on the well-travelled highway, they
became more difficult to trace, though occasionally the faint
blood-stains proclaimed their identity.

Slavin pulled up.  "Luks as if he'd shtruck back tu Cow Run again," he
said with conviction.  "Must have come from there, tu--thracks was goin'
and comin' an' ye noticed, fwhin we climbed out av th' coulee back there.
We must luk for a harse wid th' nigh-hind badly 'calked.'  Yorkey! yu'
get back an' tell that Lanky Jones feller tu come on.  Hitch yez own
harses behint our cutter an' take th' lines."  He squinted at the sun and
pulled out his watch.  "'Tis four o'clock, begob!  Twill turn bitther
cowld whin th' sun goes down."

The coroner smiled knowingly.  "Talking about 'calks'!" he remarked; and
diving into the deep recesses of his fur coat he produced a
comfortable-looking leather-encased flask.  "A little 'calk' all round
won't hurt us after that tramp, Sergeant!" he observed kindly.

Their transport presently arriving, they proceeded on their way to Cow
Run, Yorke and Redmond watching carefully for any tracks debouching from
the main trail.  Occasionally they dismounted to verify the incriminating
hoof-prints which still continued eastward.  In this fashion they finally
drew to the level of the river, where the trail forked; one arm of it
following more or less the winding course of the Bow River back westward.
At this junction they searched narrowly until they found unmistakable
indication of the blood-tinged tracks still heading in the direction of
Cow Run.

"What was that case of yours, Yorkey?" enquired Redmond.  "You know--what
Slavin was talking about?"

"Mix-up over that horse," replied Yorke laconically, "disputed ownership.
A chap named Moran tried to run a bluff over Larry that he'd lost the
horse as a colt.  They got to scrapping and I ran 'em both up before
Gully, the J. P. here.  Moran got fined twenty dollars and costs for
assaulting Blake.  Say! look at that sky!  Isn't it great?"

They turned in their saddles and looked westward.  Clean-cut against a
pale yellow-ochre background and enveloped in a deep purple bloom, the
mighty peaks of the distant "Rockies" upreared their eternal snow-capped
glory in a salute to departing day.  Above, where the opaline-tinted
horizon shaded imperceptibly into the deep ultramarine of evening, lay
glowing streamers of vivid crimson cloud-bank edged with the gleaming
gold of the sunset's after-glow.

It was a soul-filling sight.  Against it the sordid contrast of the
sinister business in hand smote them like a blow from an unseen hand, as
they resumed their monotonous scanning of the trail on its either side.

Yorke presently voiced the impression in both their hearts.  "My God'" he
murmured "the bitter irony of it!  'Peace on Earth, goodwill towards
men' . . . and this!--what?"




CHAPTER VII

  _Oh!  Bad Bill Brough, a way-back tough
    Raised hell when he struck town;
  With gun-in-fist met Sergeant Twist--
    It sure was some show-down_.
                              BALLAD OF SERGEANT TWIST


Cow Run was reached in the gathering dusk.  Seen under winter conditions
the drab little town looked dreary and uninviting enough as the party
negotiated its main street.  A frame-built hotel, a livery-stable, a
small church, a school-house, a line of false-fronted stores, and some
three-score dwellings failed to arouse in George an enthusiastic desire
to become a permanent resident of Cow Run.

The corpse they deposited temporarily in an empty shack situated in the
rear of the doctor's residence.  From long usage this place had come to
be accepted as the common morgue of the district.  After arranging
details with the coroner anent the morrow's inquest, and carefully
searching the dead man, the sergeant and his two subordinates repaired to
the livery-stable to put up their horses.

Nicholas Lee, the keeper of this establishment greeted them with wheezy
cordiality, apportioned to them stable-room and guaranteed especial care
of their horses.  In appearance that worthy would have made a passable
understudy for the elder Weller, being red-faced, generous of girth and
short of breath.  In addition to his regular calling he filled--or was
supposed to fill--the office of "town constable" and pound-keeper.  A
sort of village "Dogberry."  Incidentally it might be mentioned that he
also could have laid claim to be a "wictim of circumstances"; having but
recently contracted much the same sort of hymeneal bargain as did the
Dickensian character.  The sympathy of Cow Run, individually and
collectively, was extended to him on this account.

From his somewhat garrulous recital of the day's events it was
satisfactorily evident to his hearers that wind of the murder had not
struck Cow Run as yet.  For obvious reasons Slavin had enjoined strict
secrecy upon Lanky Jones, Lee's stable-hand.

"Ar!" wheezed Lee.  "It's a good job yu' fellers is come.  That ther
'Windy Moran's' bin raisin' hell over in the hotel th' las' two days.  He
got to fightin' ag'in las' night with Larry Blake--over that hawss.  Bob
Ingalls an' Chuck Reed an' th' bunch dragged 'em apart an' tol' Larry to
beat it back to his ranch--which he did.  Windy--they got him to bed, an'
kep' him ther all night, as he swore he'd shoot Larry.  He's still over
ther, nasty-drunk an' shootin' off what he's goin' t' do."

He rubbed his hands in gleeful anticipation, gloating deeply in his
throat: "Stirrin' times! ar! stirrin' times! . . .  Now--'bout that ther
hobo, Sargint--"

"Aw! damn th' hobo!" exploded Slavin impatiently.  "Here, Nick! show me
Windy's harse.  Fwhat?  Niver yeh mind fwhat for . . . now!  Yu'll know
all 'bout that later."

His native curiosity balked, the old gossip, with a slightly injured air,
indicating a big sorrel saddle-horse standing in a stall opposite the
Police team.  Slavin backed the animal out.  It seemed to be lame.  With
fierce eagerness they examined its "nigh-hind" leg--and found what they
sought for.

For there--where the hair joins the hoof, technically known as the
"coronet"--was a deep, jagged wound, such as is caused usually by a horse
slipping and jabbing itself with sharp-pointed shoe-calks.  The hoof
itself was stained a dull red where the blood had run down.  Slavin
picked up a fore-foot and exhibited to them the round-pointed, screwed-in
calks, commonly known as "neverslips."  He took the measurements of the
shoe and glanced at his note-book.

Finally, with a significant gesture and amidst dead silence, he thrust
the book back in his pocket.  Handing over the horse to Lee he bade him
tie it up again.

Wordlessly, the trio exchanged mystified glances.  "See here; look,
Nick!"  Slavin grasped the livery-man's fat shoulder and looked grimly
into the startled, rubicund face.  "I'm a-goin' tu put a question tu yeh,
an' 'member now. . . .  I want yeh tu think harrd! . . .  Now--whin Larry
Blake came in tu saddle-up an' pull out last night was that ther sorrel
o' Windy's still in th' stable--or not?"

"Eh?" gasped Lee at last, "I dunno!  Me nor Lanky wasn't around when
Larry pulled out.  We was over t' th' hotel, Sarjint."

Slavin released the man's shoulder with a testy, balked gesture.  "Yes!
enjoyin' th' racket an' dhrunk like th' rist, I guess! . . .  'Tis a
foine sort av town-constable yez are!"

Nick Lee maintained his air of injured innocence.  "I came round here
'bout midnight, anyways!" he protested.  "I always do--jes' t' see 'f
everythin's all right.  That hawss was in then, I will swear--'cause I
'member his halter-shank'd come untied and I fixed it.  Ev'rythin' in th'
garden was lovely 'cep' fur that 'damned hobo sneakin' round.  He was
gettin' a drink at th' trough an' I chased him.  But he beat it up inta
th' loft an'--I'm that scared of fire," he ended lamely, "I never lock up
fur that."

Slavin nodded wisely.  "Yes!  I guess he made his getaway from yu'--easy.
Mighty long toime since yuh've bin able tu dhrag yeh're guts up that
ladder--lit alone squeege thru' th' thrap-dhure.  Bet Lanky does all th'
chorin'."  He glanced around him impatiently, "But this here's all
talk--it don't lead nowheres.  Hullo! this is Gully's team, ain't it?"
He indicated a splendid pair of roans standing in a double stall nearby.

"Yes!" said Lee, "he pulled in las' night t' catch th' nine-thirty down
t' Calgary.  He ain't back yet."

"Fwas he--" Slavin checked himself abruptly--"fwhat toime did he get in
here?"

"'Bout nine."

"Fwhat toime 'bout fwas ut whin this racket shtarted up betune Windy an'
Larry?"

"Oh, I dunno, Sarjint!--'bout nine, may be--as I say I--"

"Come on!" said the sergeant, abruptly, to his men, "let's go an' eat.
Luk afther thim harses good, Nick," he flung back in a kind tone.

Outside in the dark road they gathered together, bandying mystified
conjecture in low tones.  "'Tis no use arguin', bhoys," snapped Slavin at
last, wearily, "we've got tu see Chuck Reed an' Bob Ingalls an' Brophy av
th' hotel.  Their wurrd goes--they're straight men.  If they had Windy
corralled all night, as Nick sez . . . fwhy! . . . that let's Windy out."

He was silent awhile, then: "That harse av Windy's," he burst out with an
oath, "I thought 't'was a cinch.  Somethin' passin' rum 'bout all this.
There's abs'lutely no mistake 'bout th' harse.  Somebody in this
god-forsaken burg must ha' used him tu du th' killin' wid.  Well, let's
get on."

Suddenly, as they neared the hotel, a veritable bedlam of sound fell upon
their ears, apparently from inside that hostelry--men shouting, a dog
barking, and above all the screeching, crazed voice of a drunken man.

The startled policemen dashed into the front entrance, through the office
and across the passage into the bar beyond, from whence the uproar
proceeded.

"Help!  Murder!  Pleece!" some apparently high-strung individual was
bawling.  A ludicrous, but nevertheless dangerous, sight met their eyes.

A motley crowd, composed mainly of well-dressed passengers from off the
temporarily-stalled West-bound train and a sprinkling of townsfolk, were
backed--hands up--into a corner of the bar by a big, hard-faced man clad
in range attire who was menacing them with a long-barrelled revolver.  He
was dark-haired and swarthy, with sinister, glittering eyes.  One
red-headed, red-nosed individual had apparently resented parting with the
drink that he had paid for; as in one decidedly-shaky elevated hand he
still clutched his glass, its whiskey and water contents slopping down
the neck of his nearest unfortunate neighbour.

"Mon!" he apologized, in tearful accents, "Ah juist canna help it!"

"Pitch up!" the "bad man" was shrieking, "Pitch up! yu' ----s!--That
d----d Blake--that d----d Gully!  Stealin' my hawss away'f me an' gittin'
me fined!  I'll git back at somebody fur this!  _Pleece_! yes!--yeh kin
holler '_Pleece_!'--Let me get th' drop on th' red-coated, yelluh-laigged
sons of ----!  Ah-hh!"--His eyes glittered with his insane passion, "Here
they come!  Now! watch th' ----s try an' arrest me!"

Fairly frothing at the mouth, the man, at that moment working himself
into a frenzy, was plainly as dangerous as a mad dog.  Drunk though he
undoubtedly was, he did not stagger as he stepped to and fro with
cat-like activity, his gun levelled at the policemen's heads.  It was an
ugly situation.  Slavin and his men taken utterly by surprise hesitated,
as well they might; for a single attempt to draw their sidearms might
easily bring inglorious death upon one or another of them.

We have noted that on a previous occasion Redmond demonstrated his
ability to think and act quickly.  He upheld that reputation now.  Like a
flash he ducked behind Slavin's broad shoulders and backed into the
passage.  Picking up at random the first missile available--to wit--an
empty soda-water bottle, he tip-toed swiftly along the passage to a door
opening into the bar lower down.  This practically brought him
broadside-on to his man.  A moment he peered and judged his distance
then, drawing back his arm he flung the bottle with all his force.  At
McGill he had been a base-ball pitcher of some renown, so his aim was
true.  The bottle caught its objective full in the ear.  With a scream of
pain the man staggered forward and clutched with one hand at his head,
his gun still in his grip sagging floorwards.

Instantly then, Yorke, who was the nearest, sprang at him like a tiger
and, ranging one arm around his enemy's bull neck, strove with the other
to wrest the gun from his grasp.  It was a feat however, more easily
imagined than accomplished--to disarm a powerful, active man.  The tense
fingers tightened immediately upon the weapon and resisted to their
uttermost.  Slavin and Redmond both had their side-arms drawn now, but
they were afraid to use them, on Yorke's account.  The combatants were
whirling giddily to and fro, the muzzle of the gun describing every point
of the compass.

Taking a risky chance, Slavin, watching his opportunity suddenly closed
with the struggling men and, raising his arm brought the barrel of his
heavy Colt's .45 smashing down on the knuckles of the crazed man's
gun-hand.  Instantaneously the latter's weapon dropped to the floor.

Bang!  The cocked hammer discharged one chamber--the bullet ricocheting
off the brass bar-rail deflected through a cluster of glasses and
bottles, smashing them and a long saloon-mirror into a myriad splinters.
But few of the company there escaped the deadly flying glass, as
badly-gashed faces immediately testified.  It all happened in quicker
time than it takes to relate.

"'Crown' him!" gasped Yorke, still grimly hanging onto his man, "'Crown'
the ---- good and hard!"

Redmond sprang forward, grasping a small, shot-loaded police "billy," but
Slavin interposed a huge arm.

"Nay!" he said sharply, and with curious eagerness, "Du not 'chrown' um
bhoy! lave um tu me!"  And he grasped one of the big, struggling man's
wrists firmly in a vise-like grip.  "Leggo, Yorkey!"

The latter obeyed with alacrity, and stooping he picked up the fallen
gun.  He had an inkling of what was coming.

"Ah-hh!" Slavin gloated gutterally, as he whirled his victim giddily
around and brought the man up facing him with a violent jerk--"Windy
Moran, avick!"--softly and cruelly--"me wud-be cock av a wan-harse
dump!--me wud-be 'bad-man'! . . .  Oh, yes! 'tis both shockin' an' brutil
tu misthreat ye I know but--surely, surely yeh desarve somethin' for all
this!"  And he drew back his formidable right arm.

Smack!  The terrific impact of that one, terrible open-handed slap nearly
knocked his victim through the bar-room wall.  The head rocked sideways
and the big body turned completely round.  Eyes rushing water and one
profile now resembling a slab of bloodied liver, the man reeled about in
a circle as if bereft of sight.

"Oh-hh!--Ooh!--No-o!--Ah-hh!"  The wild, moaning cry for quarter came
gaspingly out of puffed, blood-foamed lips.  But there was no mercy in
Slavin.  He looked round at the wrecked bar, the glass-slashed bleeding
faces of his men and the rest of the saloon's occupants.  He thought upon
many things--how near ignoble death many of them had been but a few
minutes before--upon insult and threat flaunted at them by a drunken,
ruffling braggadocio!--and he jerked the latter to him once more.

But his two subordinates jumped forward and made violent protest.
"Steady!"  It was Yorke now who appealed for leniency--"Go easy, Burke!
for God's sake!  You've handed him one good swipe--if he get's another
like that he'll be all in--won't be able to talk.  Let it go at that!"

The sergeant remained silent, breathing thickly and glaring at his
prisoner with sinister, glittering eyes, and still retaining the latter's
wrist in his iron grip.  But eventually the force of Yorke's reasoning
prevailed with him.  Drawing out his hand-cuffs he snapped them on the
man's wrists and haled him roughly out of the bar into the hotel office.
The crowd, recovering somewhat from their scare, would have followed, but
he curtly ordered them back and closed the door.

"Brophy!"  He beckoned the angry, frightened hotel-proprietor forward.
"Is Bob Ingalls and Chuck Reed still in town?"

"Sure!" replied the latter, "They was both in here 'bout half an hour
ago, anyways."

Slavin turned to Yorke.  "Go yu an' hunt up thim fellers an' bring thim
here!" he ordered.

"Ravin'--clean bug-house! that's what he is!" wailed Brophy.  "That bar
o' mine! oh, Lord!  Yu'll git it soaked to yu' this time, Windy, an'
don't yu' furgit it!"

The prisoner paid no attention to the landlord's revilings.  Slumped down
in a chair he had relapsed into a sort of sulky stupor, though he cringed
visibly whenever Slavin bent on him his thoughtful, sinister gaze.

Presently Yorke returned, bringing with him two respectable-looking men,
apparently ranchers, from their appearance.

Slavin nodded familiarly to them.  "Ingalls!" he addressed one of them
"I'm given tu undhershtand that yuh an' Chuck Reed there tuk charge av
this feller--" he indicated the prisoner--"last night, whin he had that
racket wid Larry Blake in th' bar?  Fwhat was they rowin' over?"

"That hawss o' Blake's mostly," was Ingalls' laconic answer.  "Course
they was slingin' everythin' else they could dig down an' drag up, too."
He chewed thoughtfully a moment, "We had some time with 'em," he added.

"Shore did!" struck in Reed.  "We was scared fur Larry, so we told him to
beat it home--which he did--an' then we got Windy up to bed an' stayed
with him nigh all night."

Slavin looked at Brophy interrogatively.  "Yuh can vouch for this, tu,
Billy?  He's bin in yu're place iver since th' throuble smarted?"

Brophy nodded.  "Yes! d----n him!  I wish he had got out before this
bizness started.  Yes! he's bin here right along, Sarjint! why?--what's
up?"

Slavin evaded the direct question for the moment.  Silently awhile he
gazed at the three wondering faces.  "Now, I'll tell yez!" he said
slowly.  And briefly he informed them of the murder--omitting all detail
of the clues obtained later.  They listened with wide eyes and broke out
into startled exclamations.  The prisoner struggled up from the chair,
his bruised, ghastly face registering fear and genuine astonishment.
Redmond shoved him back again.

"If any feller thinks--"  Moran relapsed into maudlin, hysterical
protestations of innocence, calling upon the Deity to bear witness that
he was innocent and had no knowledge whatever of how Blake came to his
death.

Eventually silence fell upon all.  Slavin cogitated awhile, then he
turned to Brophy.  "Who else was in, Billy?  Out av town fellers I mean,
fwhin this racket occurred betune these tu?  Thry an' think now!"

Brophy pondered long and presently reeled off a few names.  Slavin heard
him out and shook his head negatively.  "Nothin' doin' there!" he
announced finally, "Mr. Gully was in, yuh say?  Did he see anythin' av
this row?"

"Cudn't help it, I guess," replied Brophy.  "He just come inta th' office
for his grip while it was a-goin' on.  He beat it out quick for th'
East-bound as had just come in.  Said he was runnin' down to Calgary.  He
ain't back yet.  Guess he wudn't want to go gettin' mixed up in anythin'
like that, either--him bein' a J. P."

Slavin looked at Yorke.  "Let's have a luk at that gun av Moran's!" he
remarked.  "Fwhat is ut?"

Yorke handed the weapon over.  "'Smith and Wesson' single-action," he
said.  "Just that one round gone."

"Nothin doin' agin'," muttered Slavin disappointedly.  He broke the gun
and, ejecting the shells put all in his pocket.  He then turned to Moran.
"D----d good job for yu'--havin' this alibi, Mister Windy!" he growled,
"don't seem anythin' on yu' over this killin'--as yet!  But yez are goin'
tu get ut fwhere th' bottle got th' cork for this other bizness, me man!"

And he proceeded to formally charge and warn his prisoner.

"Give us a room, Brophy!" he said, "a big wan for th' bunch av us--an'
lave a shake-down on th' flure for this feller!"

Preceded by the landlord the trio departed upstairs, escorting their
prisoner.  Alone in the room they discussed matters in lowered tones;
Slavin and Yorke not forgetting to compliment Redmond on his presence of
mind--or, as the sergeant put it: "Divartin' his attenshun."

The big Irishman scratched his chin thoughtfully.  "I must go wire th'
O.C. report av all this.  Sind Gully comes back on th' same thrain wid
Inspector Kilbride to-morrow.  Thin we can go ahead--wid two J.P.s tu
handle things.  Yuh take charge av Mr. Man, Ridmond!  Me an' Yorke will
go an' eat now, an' relieve yuh later."




CHAPTER VIII

  "The Court is prepared, the Lawyers are met,
    The Judges all ranged, a terrible show!"
  As Captain Macheath says,--and when one's arraigned,
    The sight's as unpleasant a one as I know.
                                        THE INGOLDSBY LEGENDS.


"Orrrdher in Coort!" rang out Sergeant Slavin's abrupt command.  It was
about ten o'clock the following morning.  The hotel parlour had been
hastily transformed into a temporary court-room.  A large square table
had been drawn to one end of the room and two easy chairs placed
conveniently behind it.  Fronting it was a long bench, designed for the
prisoner and escort.  In the immediate rear were arranged a few rows of
chairs, to accommodate the witnesses and spectators.

The sergeant's order, prompted by the entrance of the two Justices of the
Peace, was the occasion of all present rising to attention, in customary
deference to police-court rules.  One of the newcomers, dressed in the
neat blue-serge uniform of an inspector of the Force, was familiar to
Redmond as Inspector Kilbride, who had been recently transferred to L
Division from a northern district.  He had close-cropped gray hair and a
clipped, grizzled moustache.  Though apparently nearing middle-age he
still possessed the slim, wiry, active figure of a man long inured to the
saddle.

The appearance of his judicial confrere fairly startled George.  He was a
huge fellow, fully as tall and as heavy a man as Slavin, though not so
compactly-built or erect as the latter.  Still, his wide, loosely-hung,
slightly bowed shoulders suggested vast strength, and his leisurely
though active movements indicated absolute muscular control.  But it was
the strangely sombre, mask-like face which excited Redmond's interest
most.  Beneath the broad, prominent brow of a thinker a pair of deep-set,
shadowy dark eyes peered forth, with the lifeless, unwinking stare of an
owl.  Between them jutted a large, bony beak of a nose, with finely-cut
nostrils.  The pitiless set of the powerful jaw was only partially
concealed by an enormous drooping moustache, the latter reddish in colour
and streaked with gray, like his thinning, carefully brushed hair.  His
age was hard to determine.  Somewhere around forty-five, George decided,
as he regarded with covert interest Ruthven Gully, Esq.,
gentleman-rancher and Justice of the Peace for the district.

The two Justices took their places with magisterial decorum, the
witnesses seated themselves again, and, all being ready, the sergeant
opened the court with its time-honoured formula.

The inspector glanced over the various "informations" and handed them
over to his confrere for perusal.  A brief whispered colloquy ensued
between them, and then the local justice settled himself back in his
chair, chin in hand.  Inspector Kilbride addressed the prisoner who had
remained standing between Yorke and Redmond, and in a clear, passionless
voice proceeded to read out the several charges.

"Do you wish to ask for a remand, Moran?" he enquired, "to enable you to
procure counsel?"

"No, sir!"  Moran's sullen, insolent eyes suddenly encountering a
dangerous, steely glare from Kilbride's gray orbs he wilted and
immediately dropped his belligerent attitude.  "No use me hirin' a
mouthpiece," he added, "as I'm a-goin' t' plead guilty t' all them
charges."

"Ah!"  The inspector thoughtfully conned over the "informations" once
more.  "Sergeant Slavin," said he presently, "what are the particulars of
this man's disorderly conduct?"

He listened awhile to the sergeant's evidence, occasionally asking a
question or two, but Mr. Gully remained in the same silent, brooding,
inscrutable attitude which he had adopted at the commencement of the
proceedings.  Though apparently listening keenly, his shadowy eyes
betrayed no interest whatever in the case.

Of that face Yorke had once remarked to Slavin: "That beggar's mug fairly
haunts me sometimes. . . .  He's a good fellow, Gully,--but, you
know--when he gets that brooding look on his face . . . he's the living
personification of a western Eugene Aram."

And Slavin, engaged in shredding a pipeful of tobacco had mumbled
absently "So?--Ujin Airum!--I du not mind th' ould shtiff--fwhat was his
reg'minthal number?"

The sergeant finished his evidence; Kilbride swung round to his
fellow-justice once more and they held a whispered consultation, the
latter making emphatic gestures throughout the colloquy.  This ending the
inspector turned to the prisoner.

"You have pleaded guilty to each of these charges.  Have you anything to
say?--any explanation to offer for your reckless, disorderly conduct?"

The prisoner swallowed nervously and shuffled with his feet.  "Guess I
was drunk," he said finally, "didn't know what I was doin'."

The inspector's grey eyes glittered coldly.  "So?" he drawled ironically,
"the sergeant's evidence is to the contrary.  It would appear that you
were not so very drunk.  You were neither staggering nor incapable at the
time.  It was merely a rehearsal of a cheap bit of dime novel sort of
bar-room, rough-house black-guardism that no doubt in various other
places you have got away with and emerged the swaggering hero.  Where do
you come from?  Whom are you working for now?"

"Havre, Montana.  I'm ridin' fur th' North-West Cattle Company."

"Ah! well, let me tell you that sort of stuff doesn't go over on this
side, my man."  He considered a moment and picked up a Criminal Code.
"In view of your pleading guilty to these charges, and therefore not
wasting the time of this court unnecessarily, I propose dealing with you
in more lenient fashion than you deserve.  For being unlawfully in
possession of firearms you are fined twenty dollars and costs.  For
'pointing fire-arms,' fifty dollars and costs.  On the charge of
'resisting the police in the execution of their duty' you are sentenced
to six months imprisonment with hard labour in the Mounted Police
Guard-room at Calgary.  You are also required to make restitution for all
damage caused as the result of your fracas."

Moran squirmed and mumbled: "If I've got t' do time on the one charge I
might as well do it on th' rest, an' save th' money fur t' pay fur th'
damage."

"Very good!" agreed the inspector coldly.  He bent again to his confrere
and they conferred awhile.  Then he turned to the prisoner.  "Thirty days
hard labour then--on each of the first two charges--sentences to run
concurrently."  He paused a space, resuming sternly: "And let me tell you
this, Moran: in view of certain wild threats uttered by you in public you
have narrowly escaped being charged with the greatest of all crimes.  It
is indeed a fortunate thing for you that you have been able to produce a
reliable alibi.  All right, Sergeant! you can close the court.  Make out
that warrant of commitment and I and Mr. Gully will sign it later.  We're
going over to see the coroner."

The two Justices arose and passed out, the few witnesses and onlookers
drifting aimlessly in their wake.  Slavin lowered himself ponderously
into the chair just vacated by the inspector, lit his pipe, and,
whistling softly, commenced to fill out a legal form.  Yorke and Redmond
also took the opportunity to indulge in a quiet smoke as they chatted
together in low tones.  The former good-naturedly tossed a cigarette over
to the prisoner, with the remark: "Have a smoke, Windy--it's the last
you'll get for some time."

Moran, slumped in a tipped-back chair, blew a whiff of smoke from a
lop-sided mouth.  "Six months!" chanted he lugubriously, "an' they call
this a free country!--free hell!--

  "_Oh, bury me out on th' lone prair-ee,
  Where th' wild ki-oot'll howl over me,--_

"--might as well an' ha' done with it!"

They all laughed unsympathetically.  "'Tis mighty lucky for yuh thim
sintences run concurrently instid av consecutively," was the sergeant's
rejoinder, "or ut'd be eight months yez ud be doin' stid av six."

The front legs of Moran's chair suddenly hit the floor with a crash.
"Lookit here, boys," he said earnestly, "that ther big mag'strate--him as
you call Gully--is that his real name?  Wher does he come from?  What
countryman is he?"

"English!" answered Yorke shortly.  "Why?  D'ye think an Englishman has
to run around with a blooming alias?"

"Well, now, yu' needn't go t' git huffy with a man!" expostulated Moran,
with an injured air.  "Th' reason I'm askin' yu' is this": He paused
impressively, with puckered, thoughtful eyes.  "That same man--if it
ain't him--is th' dead spit of a man as once hit ---- County, in Montana
'bout ten years back.  Dep'ty Sheriff--I can't mind his name now.  It was
a hell of a tough county that--then.  Th' devil himself 'ud ha' bin
scairt t' start up in bizness ther."  He shook his head slowly.  "But I
tell yu'--when Mr. Man let up with his fancy shootin' it was th'
peaceablest place in th' Union.  Th' rough stuff'd drifted--what was left
above ground.  He dragged it too, later.  I never heered wher he went."

"Ah!" remarked Slavin pityingly, knocking out his pipe.  "Th' few shots
av hootch ye had tu throw inta yu' last night tu get ye're Dutch up must
be makin' ye see double, me man.  If th' rough stuff he run inta there
was on'y th' loikes av yersilf he must have shtruck a soft snap."  He
arose.  "Put th' stringers on him agin, Ridmond, an' take um upstairs an'
lock um up!  Yu'll be escort wid um tu Calgary whin th' East-bound comes
in--an' see here, look! . . .  I want ye tu be back here agin as soon as
iver ye can make ut back.  Tchkk!" he clucked fretfully, "I wish this
autopsy an' inquest was thru', so's we cud git down tu bizness.  Phew!
this dive's stuffy--let's beat ut out a bit!"

Standing on the sidewalk they gazed casually at the slowly approaching
figures of Inspector Kilbride and Mr. Gully.  The two latter appeared to
be engaged in a vehement, though guarded conversation--stopping every now
and again, as if to debate a point.

"Here cometh Moran's 'dep'ty sheriff,'" was Yorke's facetious comment.

"By gum, though!" Redmond ejaculated, "the beggar would make a good stage
marshal, wouldn't he? . . . with that Bret Harte, forty-niner's moustache
and undertaker's mug, and top-boots and all, what?"

"And a glittering star badge," supplemented Yorke dramatically, "don't
forget that! and two murderous-looking guns slanted across his hips and--"

"Arrah, thin! shut up, Yorkey!" hissed the sergeant in a warning aside,
"they'll hear yez.  Here they come."

Presently the five were grouped together.  Inspector Kilbride's stern
features were set in a thoughtful, lowering scowl.  Mr. Gully's tanned,
leathery countenance looked curiously mottled.

"Sergeant!"  The inspector clicked off his words sharply.  "This is a bad
case.  We've just been viewing the body--Mr. Gully and I."  With
mechanical caution he glanced swiftly round.  "Let's get inside and go
over things again," he added.

Seated in the privacy of the hotel parlour the crime was discussed from
every angle with callous, professional interest.  Kilbride and Slavin did
most of the talking, though occasionally Gully interpolated with question
and comment.  He possessed a deep, booming bass voice well-suited to his
vast frame.  His speech, despite a slightly languid drawl, was
unquestionably that of an educated Englishman.  Yorke and Redmond
maintained a respectful silence in the presence of their officer, except
to answer promptly and quietly any questions put directly to them.

Personal revenge they decided eventually could be the only motive.
Robbery was out of the question, as the personal belongings of the dead
man had been found to be intact, including a valuable diamond ring, about
a hundred and fifty dollars in bills, and his watch, papers, etc.  A
jovial, light-hearted young rancher, hailing originally from the Old
Country, a bachelor of more or less convivial habits, he had enjoyed the
hearty good-will of the country-side, incurring the enmity of no one,
with the exception of Moran, as far as they knew.  The latter's alibi
having established his innocence beyond doubt, no definite clues were
forthcoming as yet, beyond the foot-prints, the horse, and the "Luger"
shell.  Moran, too, they ascertained had ridden in alone, and was not in
the habit of chumming with anyone in particular.  Slavin had prepared a
list of all known out-going and incoming individuals on and about the
date of the crime.  This was carefully conned over.  All were, without
exception, well-known respectable ranchers, and citizens of Cow Run, to
whom no suspicion could be attached.

"No!" commented the inspector wearily, at length.  "In my opinion this
has been done by someone living right here in this burg--a man whom we
could go and put our hands on this very minute--if we only had something
to work on.  You'll see . . . it'll turn out to be that later.  Just
about the last man you'd suspect, either.  Cases like this--where the
individual has nerve enough to stay right on the job and go about his
business as usual--are often the hardest nuts to crack.  You remember
that Huggard case, Sergeant?"

Many years previous he and Slavin had been non-coms together in the
Yukon, and other divisions of the Force, and now, delving back into their
memories of crime and criminals, they cited many old and grim cases, more
or less similar to the one in hand.  Yorke and Redmond listened eagerly
to their narration, but Gully betrayed only a sort of taciturn interest.
If he had any experiences of his own, he apparently did not consider it
worth while to contribute them just then; though to Slavin and Yorke he
was known to be a man who had travelled far and wide.

"Ah!" remarked the inspector, a trifle bitterly.  "If only some of these
smart individuals who write fool detective stories, with their utterly
impracticable methods, theories, and deductions, were to climb out of
their arm-chairs and tackle the real thing--had to do it for their
living--they'd make a pretty ghastly mess of things I'm thinking.  It all
looks so mighty easy--in a book.  You can see exactly how the thing
happened, put your hand on the man who did it, and all that, right from
the start.  And you begin to wonder, pityingly, why the police were such
fools as Dot to have seen through everything right away."

He paused a moment, continuing: "This is a law-abiding country.  Crimes
like this are exceptional.  We're bound to get to the bottom of this
sooner or later.  When we do--there'll be quite a lot of things crop up
in our minds that we'll be wondering we never thought of before.  Let me
have another look at that paper imprint of that over-shoe, Sergeant!"

Silently, Slavin handed it over.  Kilbride scrutinized it carefully, and
again went over all notes and figures connected with the crime.  "Must
have been a tall man--possibly six feet, or over, from the length of the
stride," he muttered, "and heavy, from the depth of the imprint."  He
noted the distance from the big boulder to where the body had first
fallen.  "Gad!  what shooting! . . .  The man must have been a holy
fright with a revolver--to have confidence in himself to be able to kill
at that range.  I've never known anything like it.  Well! . . .  One sure
thing"--he laughed grimly--"you can't go searching every decent citizen
here for a Luger gun, or demanding to measure his feet--without
reasonable suspicion.  Why!  It might be you, Sergeant--or Mr. Gully,
here . . . you're both big men. . . ."

Long afterwards, well they remembered the inspector's random jest--how
Gully, with one hand slid into his breast, and the other dragging at his
great drooping moustache (mannerisms of his) had joined in the general
laugh with his hollow, guttural "Ha! ha!"

The inspector's levity suddenly vanished.  "That old fool of a
livery-stable keeper, Lee, or whatever his name is . . . if only he, or
someone had been around when the horse was brought back that night!
D----n it! there must have been somebody around, surely.  That's what
this case hinges on."

He looked at his watch.  "Well!  Work on that--to your utmost, Sergeant.
Stay right with it until you get that evidence.  You'll drop onto your
man sooner or later, I know.  That train should be in soon, now.  I'll
have to get back.  The Commissioner's due from Regina, sometime today,
and I've got to be on hand.  Wire the finding of the inquest as soon as
it's over, and send in a full crime-report of everything!"

He glanced casually at the bruised faces of Yorke and Redmond.  "You men
must have had quite a tussle with that fellow, Moran!" he remarked
whimsically.  "You seem to have come off the best, Sergeant.  You're not
marked at all."

"Some tussle all right, Sorr!" agreed that worthy evenly, his tongue in
his cheek.  "Yu' go git yu're prisoner, Ridmond, an' be ready whin that
thrain comes in.  Come back on the next way-freight west, if there's wan
behfure th' passenger.  We'll need yez."

Gully murmured some hospitable suggestion to Kilbride, and the two
gentlemen strolled into the wrecked bar.  The train presently arrived and
departed eastwards, bearing on it the inspector, Redmond, and his
prisoner.

"Strange thing," the officer had remarked musingly to Slavin, just prior
to his departure, "I seem to know that man Gully's face, but somehow I
can't place him.  He introduced himself to me on the train coming up.  Of
course I'm familiar with his name, as the J.P. here, but I can't recall
ever meeting him before."

Sometime later, Slavin and Yorke, who had just returned from the gruesome
autopsy and were busily making arrangements for the afternoon's inquest,
heard a loud, cackling commotion out in the main street.  They
immediately stepped outside the hotel to see what was the matter.

Advancing towards them, and puffing with exertion and importance, they
beheld Nick Lee, haling along at arm's length an unkempt individual whom
they judged to be the hobo who had disturbed his peace of mind.  A small
retinue of dirty urchins, jeering loafers, and barking dogs brought up
the rear.  The village "Dogberry" drew nigh with his victim and halted,
as empurpled as probably the elder Weller was, after ducking Mr. Stiggins
in the horse-trough.

"Sarjint!" he panted triumphantly "I did clim up that ther ladder!  I did
git thru' th' trap-door! . . . an'--I did ketch that feller!"  Suddenly
his jaw dropped, and he wilted like a pricked bladder.  "Why!  what's
up?" he queried with a crestfallen air, as he beheld Slavin's angry,
worried countenance.

"Damnation!" muttered the latter softly and savagely to Yorke.  "This
means another thrip tu Calgary--wid this 'bo'--an' me not able tu shpare
ye just now.  Fwhat wid all this other bizness I'd forgotten all 'bout
him.  An' we'd vagged him sooner Ridmond might have taken th' tu av thim
down tugither.  Da----."  The oath died on his lips and he remained
staring at the hobo as a sudden thought struck him.  His gaze flickered
to Yorke's face, and his subordinate nodded comprehensively.

Slavin beckoned to Lee.  "Take um inside the hotel parlour, Nick," he
ordered, "fwhere we hild coort this mornin.'  Yorkey, yu' go an' hunt up
Mr. Gully.  I don't think he's pulled out yet, has he, Nick?"  He spoke
now with a certain grim eagerness.

The livery-man made a gesture in the negative, and Yorke departed upon
his quest.  Slavin ushered Lee and the hobo into the room.  To the
sergeant's surprise he beheld the justice sitting at the table writing.
He concluded that that gentleman must have just stepped in from the rear
entrance of the hotel, or the bar, during his own and Yorke's temporary
absence.

At the entrance of the trio Gully raised his head and, with the pen
poised in his fingers, sat perfectly motionless, staring at them
strangely out of his shadowy eyes.  His face seemed transformed into a
blank, expressionless mask.  The sergeant leaned over the table and spoke
to him in a rapid aside.

"Ah!" murmured Mr. Gully, and he remained for a space in deep thought.
"Sergeant," he began presently, "I'll have to be pulling out soon.
Before we start in with this man . . . will you kindly step down to
Doctor Cox's with these papers and ask him to sign them?"

It seemed an ordinary request.  Slavin complied.

Returning some ten or fifteen minutes later he noticed Lee was absent.
The magistrate answered his query.  "Sent him round to throw the harness
on my team," he drawled, as he pored over a Criminal Code, "he'll be back
in a moment--ah! here he is."  And just then the latter entered, along
with Yorke.  The hobo was sitting slumped in a chair, as Slavin had left
him.  With one accord they all centred their gaze upon the unkempt
delinquent.  Ragged and unwashed, he presented a decidedly unlovely
appearance, which was heightened by his stubble-coated visage showing
signs as of recent ill-usage.  His age might have been anything between
thirty and forty.

The sergeant, a huge, menacing figure of a man, stepped forward and
motioned to him to stand.  "Now, see here; look, me man!" he said slowly
and distinctly, a sort of tense eagerness underlying his soft tones,
"behfure I shtart in charrgin' ye wid anythin' I'm goin' tu put a few
questions tu ye in front av this ginthleman"--he indicated the
justice--"He's a mag'strate, so ye'd best tell th' trute.  Now--th' night
behfure last--betune say, nine an' twelve o'clock . . . fwhere was
ye?"--he  paused--"Think harrd, an' come across wid th' straight goods."

A tense silence succeeded.  The hobo, the cynosure of a ring of watchful
expectant faces, mumbled indistinctly, "I was sleepin'--up in th' loft o'
th' livery-stable."

"Did yeh--" Slavin eyed the man keenly--"did yeh see--or hear--any fella
take a harse out av th' shtable durin' that time?"

Gully moved slightly.  With the mannerism he affected, his left hand
dragging at his moustache and his right slid between the lapels of his
coat, he leaned forward and fixed his eyes full upon the hobo's battered
visage.

Meeting that strange, compelling gaze the latter: stared back at him, his
face an ugly, expressionless mask.  He shuffled with his feet.  "Why,
yes!" he said finally, "I did heer a bunch o' fellers come in.  They was
a-talkin' all excited-like 'bout a fight, or sumphin'.  They was
a-hollerin', 'Beat it, Larry!  beat it!' t' somewun, an' I heered some
feller say: 'All right! give us my ---- saddle!' an' then it sounded like
as if a horse was bein' taken out.  I didn't heer no more after
that--went t' sleep.  I 'member comin' down 'bout th' middle o' th' night
t' git a drink at th' trough.  This feller come in then,"--he indicated
Lee.  "He hollered sumphin' an' started in t' chase me . . . so I beat it
up inta th' loft agin'."  He shivered.  "'T'was cold up ther--I well-nigh
froze," he whined.

The sergeant exhausted his no mean powers of exhortation.  It was all in
vain.  The hobo protested that he had neither seen nor heard anyone else
taking out, or bringing in, a horse during the night.

Slavin finally ceased his efforts and glowered at the man in silent
impotence.  "How come yez tu get th' face av yez bashed up so?" he
demanded.

"Fell thru' one o' th' feed-holes up in th' loft," was the sulky response.

"Fwhat name du ye thravel undher?"

"Dick Drinkwater."

"Eh?" the sergeant glanced critically at the red, bulbous nose.  "Fwhat's
in a name?" he murmured.  "Eyah! fwhat's in a name?"

Glibly the tramp commenced an impassioned harangue, dwelling upon the
hardness of life in general, snuffling and whining after the manner of
his kind.  How could a crippled-up man like him obtain work?  He thrust
out a grimy right hand--minus two fingers.  He had been a sawyer, he
averred.

Slavin sniffed suspiciously.  "Ye shtink av whiskey, fella!" he said
sharply.  "That nose, yeh name, an' a hard-luck spiel du not go well
together.  Fwhere did yu' get yu're dhrink?"

The hobo was silent.  "Come across," said Slavin sternly, "fwhere did ye
get ut?"

"I had a bottle with me when I come off th' train," said the other, "ther
was a drop left in an' I had it just now."

In the light of after events, well did Slavin and Yorke recall the
furtive appealing glance the hobo threw at Gully; well did they also
remember certain of Kilbride's words: "There'll be quite a lot of things
crop up in our minds that we'll be wondering we never thought of before."

The justice cleared his throat.  "Sergeant" came his guttural, booming
bass, "suppose!--suppose!" he reiterated suavely "on this occasion
we--er--temper justice with mercy--ha! ha!"  His deep hollow laugh jarred
on their nerves most unpleasantly.  "I need a man at my place just now,"
he went on, "to buck wood and do a little odd choring around.  Times are
rather hard just now, as this poor fellow says.  If you insist--er--why,
of course I've no other option but to send him down . . . you understand?
I would not presume to dictate to you your duty.  On the other hand . . .
if you are not specially anxious to press a charge of vagrancy against
this man I--er--am willing to give him a chance to obtain this work--that
he insists he is so anxious to find."

Slavin's face cleared and he emitted a weary sigh of relief.  "As you
will, yeh're Worship," he said.  "T'will be helpin' me out, tu . . . yeh
undhershtand?"  His meaning stare drew a comprehensive nod from Gully.
"I have not a man tu shpare for escort just now."

He turned to the hobo.  "Fwhat say yu', me man?" was his curt ultimatum,
"Fwhat say yu'--tu th' kindniss av his Worship?  Will yeh go wurrk for
him? . . .  Or be charged wid vagrancy?"

The offer was accepted with alacrity.  In the hobo's one uninjured optic
shone a momentary gleam of intelligence, as he continued to stare at
Gully, like a dog at its master.  The gleam was reflected in a pair of
shadowy, deep-set eyes, unblinking as an owl's.

Gully arose and looked at Lee.  "All right then! you can hitch up my
team, Nick!" he said, and that rotund worthy waddled away on his mission.
"Come on, my man" he continued to the hobo, "we'll go round to the
stable."  He turned to Slavin and Yorke, shedding his magisterial
deportment.  "Well, good-bye, you fellows!" he said, with careless
bonhomie.  He lowered his voice in an aside to Slavin.  "Sergeant, I
trust I shall see, or hear from you again shortly.  I would like to hear
the result of the inquest and--er--how you are progressing with the case."

A few minutes later they heard the silvery jingle of his cutter's bells
gradually dying away in the distance.  Slavin aroused himself from a
scowling, brooding reverie.  "G----d d----n!" he spat out to Yorke, from
between clenched teeth, "ther' goes another forlorn hope.  'Tis no manner
av use worryin' tho'--let's go get that jury empannelled!"  He uttered a
snorting chuckle as a thought seemed to strike him.  "H-mm!  Gully must
be getthin' tindher-hearthed!  Th' last vag we had up behfure him he sint
um down for sixty days."




CHAPTER IX

  _Take order now, Gehazi,
    That no man talk aside
  In secret with his judges
    The while his case is tried,
  Lest he should show them--reason
    To keep a matter hid,
  And subtly lead the questions
    Away from what he did._
                        KIPLING.


"Hullo!" quoth Constable Yorke facetiously, "behold one cometh, with
blood in her eye!  Egad!  Don't old gal Lee look mad?  Like a wet hen.  I
guess she's just off the train and Nick hasn't met her.  There'll be
something doing when she lands home."

It was about ten o'clock on the following morning.  The three policemen
(Redmond had returned on a freight during the night) were standing
outside the small cottage, next the livery-stable, the abode of Nick Lee
and his spouse.  After a casual inspection of their horses they were
debating as to possible suspects and their next course of action.
Yorke's remarks were directed at a stout, red-faced, middle-aged woman
who was just then approaching them.  She looked flustered and angry and
was burdened down with parcels great and small.  As she halted outside
the gate one of the packages slipped from her grasp and fell in the mud.
Unable to bend down, she gazed at it helplessly a moment.  Yorke,
stepping forward promptly, picked up the parcel, wiped it and tucked it
under her huge arm.

"Thank ye, Mister Yorke," she ejaculated gratefully, "'tis a gentleman ye
are," she glowered a moment at the cottage, "which is more'n I kin say
fur that mon o' mine, th' lazy good-fur-nothin', . . . leavin' me t' pack
all these things from th' train!"

Like a tug drawing nigh to its mooring--and nearly as broad in the
beam--she came to anchor on the front steps and kicked savagely at the
door.  A momentary glimpse they got of Nick Lee's face, in all its
rubicund helplessness, and then the door banged to.  From an open window
soon emerged the sounds as of a domestic broil.

"Talk av Home Rule, an' 'Th' Voice that breathed o'er Eden'," murmured
Slavin.  "Blarney me sowl! just hark tu ut now?"

From the cottage's interior came several high-pitched female squawks,
punctuated by the ominous sounds as of violent thumps being rained upon a
soft body, and suddenly the portal disgorged Lee--in erratic haste.  His
hat presently followed.  Dazedly awhile he surveyed the grinning trio of
witnesses to his discomfiture; then, picking up his battered head-piece
he crammed it down upon his bald cranium with a vicious, yet abject,
gesture.

"Th' missis seems onwell this mornin'," he mumbled apologetically to
Slavin, "I take it yore not a married man, Sarjint?"

"Eh?" ejaculated that worthy sharply, his levity gone on the instant.
"Who--me?"  Blankly he regarded the miserable face of his interlocutor,
one huge paw of a hand softly and surreptitiously caressing its fellow,
"Nay--glory be!  I am not."

"Har!" shrilled the Voice, its owner, fat red arms akimbo, blocking up
the doorway, "Nick, me useless man! ye kin prate t' me 'bout arrestin'
hoboes.  I tell ye right now--that hobo that was a-bummin' roun' here
t'other mornin's got nothin' on you fur sheer, blowed-in-th'-glass
laziness."

"Fwhat?"  Slavin violently contorting his grim face into a horrible
semblance of persuasive gallantry edged cautiously towards the irate
dame--much the same as a rough-rider will "So, ho, now!" and sidle up to
a bad horse.  "Mishtress Lee," began he, in wheedling, dulcet tones,
"fwhat mornin' was that?"

That lady, her capacious, matronly bosom heaving with emotion, eyed him
suspiciously a moment.  "Eh?" she snapped.  "Why th' mornin' after th'
night of racket between them two men at th' hotel.  Th' feller come
bummin' roun' th' back-door fur a hand-out--all starved t' death--just
before I took th' train t' Calgary."  She dabbed at the false-front of
red hair, which had become somewhat disarranged.  "La, la!" she murmured,
"I'm all of a twitter!"

"Some hand-out tu," remarked Slavin politely, "from th' face av um. . . .
Fwhat was ut ye handed him, Mishtress Lee, might I ask?--th' flat-iron or
th' rollin' pin?"

"I did not!" the dame retorted indignantly.  "I gave him a cup of coffee
an' sumphin' t' eat--he was that cold, poor feller--an' I arst him how
his face come t' be in such a state.  He said sumphin 'bout it bein' so
cold up in th' loft he come down amongst th' horses 'bout midnight--t'
get warmed up.  He said he was lyin' in one o' th' mangers asleep when a
feller brought a horse in--an' th' light woke him up an' when he went t'
climm outa th' manger th' horse got scared an' pulled back an' musta
stepped on this feller's foot--fur th' feller started swearin' at him an'
pulled him outa th' manger an' beat him up an'--"

But Slavin had heard enough.  With a most ungallant ejaculation he swung
on his heel and started towards the stable, beckoning hastily to Yorke
and Redmond to follow.

"Yu hear that?" he burst out on them, with lowered, savage tones.  "I
knew ut--I felt ut at th' toime--that shtinkin' rapparee av a hobo was
lyin'--whin he said he did not renumber a harse bein' brought back.  We
must go get um--right-away!"  His grim face wore a terribly ruthless
expression just then.  "My God!" he groaned out from between clenched
teeth, "but I will put th' third degree tu um, an' make um come across
this toime!  Saddle up, bhoys! while I go an' hitch up T an' B.
Damnation!  I wish Gully's place was on the phone!"

Some quarter of an hour later they were proceeding rapidly towards
Gully's ranch which lay some fifteen miles west of Cow Run, on the lower
or river trail.  A cold wind had sprung up and the weather had turned
cloudy and dull, as if presaging snow, two iridescent "sun-dogs"
indicating a forthcoming drop in the temperature.

Yorke and Redmond, riding in the cutter's wake, carried on a desultory.
Jerky conversation anent the many baffling aspects of the case in hand.
Gully's name came up.  His strange personality was discussed by them from
every angle; impartially by Yorke--frankly antagonistically by Redmond.

"Yes! he is a rum beggar, in a way," admitted Yorke, "not a bad sort of
duck, though, when you get to know him--when he's not in one of his
rotten, brooding fits.  He sure gets 'Charley-on-his-back' sometimes.
Used to hit the booze pretty hard one time, they say.  Tried the
'gold-cure'--then broke out again"--he lowered his voice at the huge,
bear-like back of the sergeant--"all same him.  I don't know--somehow--it
always seems to leave em' cranky an' queer--that.  Neither of 'em married
either--'baching it,' living alone, year after year, and all that, too."

"Better for you--if you took the cure, too!"  George flung at him
grinning rudely.  He neck-reined Fox sharply and dodged a playful punch
from his comrade.  "Yorkey, old cock, I'm goin' to break you from 'hard
stuff' to beer--if I have to pitch into you every day."

"You're an insultin', bullyin' young beggar," remarked Yorke ruefully.
"I'll have to 'take shteps,' as Burke says, and discipline you a bit,
young fellow-me-lad!  I don't wonder the old man pulled you in from
Gleichen.  Come to think of it, why, you're the bright boy that they say
well-nigh started a mutiny down Regina!  We heard a rumour about it up
here.  Say, what was that mix-up, Reddy?"

George chuckled vaingloriously.  "All over old 'Laddie'," he said.
"'Member that white horse?  I forget his regimental number, but he was
about twenty-five years old.  You remember how they'd taught him to chuck
up his head and 'laugh'?  I was grooming him at 'midday stables.'  Old
Harry Hawker was the sergeant taking 'stables' that day.  He was stalking
up and down the gangway, blind as a bat, with his crop under his arm, and
his glasses stuck on the end of his nose--peering, peering.  Well, old
Laddie happened to stretch himself, as a horse will, you know, stuck out
his hind leg, and old Harry fell wallop over it and tore his
riding-pants, and just then I said 'Laugh, Laddie!' and he chucked his
old head up and wrinkled his lips back.  Of course the fellows fairly
howled and Harry lost his temper and let in to poor old Laddie with his
crop.  It made me mad when he started that and I guess I gave him some
lip about it.  He 'pegged' me for Orderly-room right-away for
insubordination.'

"I pleaded 'not guilty' and got away with it, too.  Got all kinds of
witnesses--most of 'em only too d----d glad to be able to get back at
Harry for little things.  Laddie was a proper pet of the Commissioner's.
He used to go into No. Four Stable and play with the old beggar and feed
him sugar nearly every day."

Yorke laughed mischievously, and was silent awhile.  "Gully's knocked
about a deuce of a lot," he resumed presently.  "Now and again he'll open
up a bit and talk, but mostly he's as close as an oyster--and the way he
can drop that drawl and come out 'flat-footed' with the straight
turkey--why, it'd surprise you!  You'd think he was an out and out
Westerner, born and bred.  He's a mighty good man on a horse, and around
cattle--and with a lariat.  I don't know where the beggar's picked it up.
He claims he's only been in this country five years.  Talks mostly about
the Gold Coast, and Shanghai, and the Congo.  A proper 'Bully Hayes' of a
man he was there, too, I'll bet!  He never says much about the States,
though I did hear him talking to a Southerner once, and begad, it was
funny!  You could hardly tell their accents apart.

"Oh, he's not a bad chap to have for a J.P.  It's mighty hard to get any
local man to accept a J.P.'s commission, anyway.  They're most of 'em
scared of it getting them in bad with their neighbours.  Gully--he
doesn't care a d----n for any of 'em, though.  He'll sit on any case.
It's a good thing to have a man who's absolutely independent, like that.
I sure have known some spineless rotters.  No, we might have a worse J.P.
than Gully."

"Oh, I don't know," rejoined Redmond thoughtfully, "may be he's all
right, but, somehow . . . the man's a kind of 'Doctor Fell' to me--has
been--right from the first time I 'mugged' him.  Chances are though, that
it's only one of those false impressions a fellow gets.  What's up?"

Yorke, shading his eyes from the cutting wind was staring ahead down the
long vista of trail.  "Talk of the Devil!" he muttered, "why! here the
---- comes!" Aloud, he called out to Slavin.  "Oh, Burke! here comes
Gully--riding like hell, I know that Silver horse of his."

And, far-off as yet, but rapidly approaching them at a gallop, they
beheld a rider.

"Sure is hittin' th' high spots," remarked the sergeant wonderingly,
"fwhat th' divil's up now?"

Gradually the distance lessened between them and presently Gully, mounted
upon a splendid, powerfully-built gray, checked his furious pace and
reined in with an impatient jerk, a few lengths from the police team.
Redmond could not help noticing that Gully, for a heavy man, possessed a
singularly-perfect seat in the saddle, riding with the sure, free,
unconscious grace of an _habitué_ of the range.  He was roughly dressed
now, in overalls, short sheepskin coat, and "chaps."

He shouted a salutation to the trio, his usually immobile face
transformed into an expression of scowling anxiety.  "Hullo!" he boomed,
his guttural bass sounding hoarse with passion, "You fellows didn't meet
that d----d hobo on the trail, I suppose? . . .  I'm looking for him--in
the worst way!"

He flung out of saddle and strode alongside the cutter.  "About two hours
ago--'not more, I'll swear--I pulled out to take a ride around the
cattle--like I usually do, every day.  I left the beggar busy enough,
bucking fire-wood.  I wasn't away much over an hour, but when I got back
I found he'd drifted--couldn't locate him anywhere.

"Then I remembered I'd left some money lying around--inside the drawer of
a bureau in my bedroom--'bout a hundred, I guess--in one of these
black-leather bill-folders.  Sure enough, it's gone, too.  Damnation!"

He leaned up against the cutter and mopped his streaming forehead.  "I
was a fool to ever attempt to help a man like that out," he concluded
bitterly.  "It serves me right!"

"Well," said Slavin, with an oath, "th' shtiff cannot have got far-away
in that toime.  I want um as bad as yuh, Mr. Gully.  We were on th' way
tu yu're place for um.  See here; luk!"

Gully heard him out and whistled softly at the conclusion of the
narrative.  "Once collar this man, Sergeant," said he, "and--you've
practically got your case.  Make him talk?"--the low, guttural laugh was
not good to hear--"Oh, yes! . . .  I think between us we could accomplish
that all right! . . .  Yes-s!"

His voice died away in a murmur, a cruel glint flickered in his shadowy
eyes, and for a space he remained with folded arms and his head sunk in a
sort of brooding reverie.  Suddenly, with an effort, he seemed to arouse
himself.  "Oh, about that inquest, Sergeant," he queried casually, "what
was the jury's finding?  I was forgetting all about that."

"Eyah; on'y fwhat yuh might expect," replied the latter.  "Death by
shootin', at th' hand av some person unknown.  I wired headquarthers
right-away."  He made a slightly impatient movement.  "Well, we must get
busy, Mr. Gully; this shtiff connot be far away.  Not bein' on th'
thrail, betune us an' yu', means he's either beat ut shtraight south from
yu're place an' over th' ice tu th' railway-thrack, or west a piece, an'
thin onto th' thrack.  Yu'll niver find a hobo far away from th' line.
He'd niver go thrapsein' thru' th' snow tu th' high ground beyant.  Yuh
cud shpot him plain for miles--doin' that--comin' along."

"He's wearing old, worn-out boots," said Yorke, "got awful big feet, too,
I remember.  Of course this trail's too beaten up from end to end to be
able to get a line on foot-prints.  We might work slowly back to your
place, though, Mr. Gully, and keep a lookout for any place where he may
have struck south off the trail, as the Sergeant says."

It seemed the only thing to do.  The party moved leisurely forward, Gully
riding ahead of the cutter, Yorke and Redmond in its wake, as before,
well-spread out on either side of the well-worn trail.  Here, the snow
was practically undisturbed, affording them every opportunity of
discovering fresh foot-prints debouching from the main trail.  It was
rather exacting, monotonous work, necessitating cautious and leisurely
progress; but they stuck to it doggedly until sometime later they rounded
a bend in the river and came within sight of Gully's ranch, about a mile
distant.

Presently that gentleman pulled up and swung out of saddle.  "Half a
minute," he said, "my saddle's slipping!  I want to tighten my cinch."

The small cavalcade halted.  Slavin's restless eyes roving over the
expanse of unbroken snow on his left hand, suddenly dilated, and he
uttered an eager exclamation, pointing downwards with outflung arm.

"Ah," said he grimly, "here we are, I'm thinkin'!" And he clambered
hastily out of the cutter.

Yorke and Redmond, dismounting swiftly, stepped forward with him and
examined minutely the unmistakably fresh imprints of large-sized feet
angling off from the trail towards the bank of the frozen river.

"Hob-nailed boots!" ejaculated Yorke.  "Guess that must be him, all
right, Mr. Gully?"

The latter bent and scrutinized the imprints.  "Sure must be," he
rejoined, with conviction.  "A man walking out on the range is a
curiosity.  I can't think how I could have missed them--coming along.
But I guess I was so mad, and in such a devil of a hurry I didn't notice
much.  I made sure of catching up to him somewhere on the trail."

Slavin beckoned to Redmond and, much to that young gentleman's chagrin,
bade him hold the lines of the restless team, while he (Slavin), along
with Yorke and Gully, started forwards trailing the footprints.  Arriving
at the river's edge they slid down the bank and followed the tracks over
the snow-covered ice to the centre of the river.  Here was open water for
some distance; the powerful current at this point keeping open a ten-foot
wide steaming fissure.  The tracks hugged its edge to a point about four
hundred yards westward, where the fissure closed up again and enabled
them to cross to the opposite bank.  Clambering up this their quest led
them across a long stretch of comparatively level ground to the fenced-in
railway-track.

Ducking under the lower strand of wire they reached the line.  At the
foot of the graded road-bed, Slavin, who was ahead, halted suddenly and
uttered an oath.  Stooping down he picked up something and, turning round
to his companions exhibited his find.  It was a small, black-leather
bill-folder--empty.

Gully regarded his lost property with smouldering eyes, and he uttered a
ghastly imprecation.  "Yes, that's it," he said simply, "beggar's boned
the bills and chucked this away for fear of incriminating evidence--in
case he was nabbed again, I suppose.  The bills were mostly in fives and
tens--Standard Bank--I remember."

They climbed up onto the track to determine whether the foot-prints
turned east or west; but further quest here proved useless, on account of
its being a snow-beaten section-hand trail.

Slavin balked again, swore in fluent and horrible fashion.  For a space
he remained in brooding thought, then he turned abruptly to his
companions.

"Come on," he jerked out savagely, "let's get back."

In silence they retraced their steps and eventually reached their horses.
Here the sergeant issued curt orders to his men.

"'Tis onlikely th' shtiff can have got very far away--in th' toime Mr.
Gully tells us," he said, "an' he cannot shtay out in th' opin for long
this weather.  Get yu're harses over th' ice, bhoys, an' make th' thrack.
Ye'll find an' openin' in th' fence somewheres.  Thin shplit, an' hug th'
line--west, yu', Yorkey--as far as Coalmore--yu', Ridmond--back tu Cow
Run.  Yez know fwhat tu du.  Pass up nothin'--culverts, bridges,
section-huts--anywhere's th' shtiff may be hidin'.  If yez du not dhrop
onto um betune thim tu places--shtay fwhere yez are an' search all
freights.  'Phone th' agent at Davidsburg if yez want tu get me.  I'm
away from there now--to wire east an' west.  Thin--I'm goin' tu ride
freight awhile, up an' down th' thrack.  I can get Clem Wilson tu luk
afther T an' B.  We must get this man, bhoys."

"Look here, Sergeant," broke in Gully good-naturedly, "as this is partly
on my account I feel it's up to me to try and do what little I can do to
help you in this case.  There's not much doing at the ranch just now, so,
if you've no objection, I'll put Silver along with your team and come
with you.  As you say--we've simply got to get this fellow, somehow."

"Thank ye, Mr. Gully," responded Slavin gratefully, "betune th' bunch av
us we shud nail th' shtiff all right."

"Should!" agreed the magistrate, enigmatically, "'stiff's' the word for
him."  He glanced up at the lowering sky.  "Hullo!  It's beginning to
snow again--you found those tracks just in time, Sergeant."


Six days elapsed.  Six days of fruitless, monotonous work.  The evening
of the seventh found the trio disconsolately reunited in their
detachment.  Their quest had failed.  Slavin, not sparing himself, had
worked Yorke and Redmond to the limits of their endurance, and they,
fully realizing the importance of their objective, had responded loyally.

Gully, apparently betraying a keen interest in the case, had gone out of
his way to assist them--both on the railroad and in scouring the
country-side.  They were absolutely and utterly played out, and their
nerves were jangled and snappy.  No possible hiding-place had been
overlooked--yet the hobo--Dick Drinkwater--the one man who undoubtedly
held the key to the mysterious murder of Larry Blake--had disappeared as
completely as if the earth had swallowed him up.

The horses cared for, and supper over, Yorke and Redmond lay back on
their cots and _blaguè'd_ each other wearily anent their mutual ill-luck.
Slavin, critically conning over a lengthy crime-report on the case that
he had prepared for headquarters, flung his composition on the table and
leant back dejectedly in his chair.

"Hoboes?" quoth he, darkly, and tongue-clucked in dismal fashion.  "Eyah!
I just fancy I can hear th' ould man dishcoursin' tu Kilbride av th'
merry, int'restin' ways an' habits av th' genus--hobo--whin he get's this
report av mine. . . .  Like he did wan day whin he was doin' show-man
round th' cells wid a bunch av ould geezers av 'humanytaruns.'  I mind I
was Actin' Provo' in charge av th' Gyard-room at th1 toime."

He sighed deeply, folded up the report and thrust it into an official
envelope.  "Well, bhoys," he concluded, "we have done all that men
can'--for th' toime bein' anyways."

Yorke laughed somewhat mirthlessly and gazed dreamily up at his pictures.
"Sure have," he agreed languidly; "from now on, though, I guess we'll
just have to take a leaf out of Micawber's book--'wait for something to
turn up,' eh, Reddy, my old son?"

There was no answer.  That young worthy, utterly exhausted, had drifted
into the arms of Morpheus.




CHAPTER X

  _A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
  Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
  Of him that makes it._
                             SHAKESPEARE.


Number Six, from the East, drew up at the small platform of Davidsburg
and presently steamed slowly on its way westward, minus three passengers.

"Well, bhoys," said Sergeant Slavin to his henchmen, "here we are---back
tu th' land av our dhreams wanst more.  Glory be!  But I'm glad tu be
quit av that warrm, shtinkin' courthroom.  Denis Ryan--th' ould rapparee,
he wint afther us harrd--in that last case.  Eyah!  But I thrimmed um in
th' finals.  Wan Oirishman cannot put ut over another wan."

He softly rubbed his huge hands together.  "Five years!  That'll tache
Mishter Joe Lawrence tu go shtickin' his brand on other people's cattle!
But--blarney me sowl!  Ryan sure is a bad man tu run up agin when he's
actin' for th' defence."

The trio had just returned from a Supreme Court sitting where they had
been handling their various cases.  It was a gloriously sunny day in
June.  A wet spring, succeeded by a spell of hot weather, had transformed
the range into a rolling expanse of green, over which meandered bunches
of horses and cattle, their sleek hides and well-rounded bodies
proclaiming abundant assimilation of nourishing pasture.

To men who for the past week had of necessity been confined within the
stifling atmosphere of a crowded court-room, their present surroundings
appealed as especially restful and exhilarating.  During their absence
their horses had been enjoying the luxury of a turn-out in the fenced
pasture at the rear of the detachment, where there was good feed and a
spring.

The murder of Larry Blake the previous winter still remained a baffling
mystery.  Locally it had proved, as such occurrences usually do, merely a
proverbial nine days wonder.  Long since, in the stress and interest of
current events, it had faded more or less from the minds of all men,
excepting the Mounted Police, who, though saying little concerning it,
still kept keenly on the alert for any possible clue.  Equally mystifying
was the uncanny disappearance of the hobo--Drinkwater.  So far that
individual had succeeded in eluding apprehension, although minute
descriptions of him had been circulated broadcast to police agencies
throughout Canada and the United States.

"Eyah!" Sergeant Slavin was wont to remark sagely: "'Tis an ould saying
bhoys--'Murdher will out'--we'll sure dhrop onto it sooner or lather, an'
thin belike we'll get th' surprise av our lives--for I firmly believe, as
Kilbride said--'t'will prove tu be some lokil man who had a grudge agin'
pore Larry for somethin' or another.  So--just kape on quietly
watchin'--an' listh'nin, an' we'll nail that fella yet."

Just now that worthy was surveying his subordinates with a care-free
smile of bonhomie.  "Guess we'll dhrop inta th' shtore on our way up"
suggested he, "see'f there's any mail, an' have a yarn wid ould MacDavid."

Half way up the long, winding, graded trail that led to the detachment,
the trio turned into another trail which traversed it at this point.
Following this for some few hundred yards westward they reached the
substantial abode of Morley MacDavid, who was, as his name suggested, the
hamlet's oldest settler and its original founder.

His habitation--combining store, post-office, and ranch-house--was a
commodious frame dwelling, unpretentious in appearance but not wanting in
evidences of prosperity.  Its rear presented the usual aspect of a ranch,
with huge, well-built barns and corrals.  Although it was summer, many
wide stacks of hay and green oats, apparently left over from the previous
season, suggested that he was a cautious man with an eye to stock-feeding
during the winter months.  To neglect of the precaution of putting up
sufficient feed to tide over the severe weather might be attributed most
of the annual ranching failures in the West.  The MacDavid establishment
bore a well-ordered aspect, unlike many of the unthrifty, ramshackle
ranches, of his neighbours.  The fencing was of the best, and there were
no signs of decay or dilapidation in any of the buildings.  Dwarf pines
were planted about and a Morning Glory vine over-ran the house, giving
the place an air of restful domesticity.  As they entered the store the
trio noticed a saddle-horse tied to the hitching-rail outside.

They were greeted jovially by MacDavid himself.  Lounging behind his
store-counter, with his back up against a slung pack of coyote skins, he
was listening in somewhat bored fashion to a talkative individual
opposite.  He evidently hailed their arrival as a welcome diversion.  In
personality, Morley MacDavid was an admirable type of the western
pioneer.  A tall, slimly-built, but wiry, active man of fifty, or
thereabouts, with grizzled hair and moustache.  Burnt out and totally
ruined three successive times in the past by the depredations of
marauding Indians, the fierce, indomitable energy of the broken man had
asserted itself and enabled him finally to triumph over all his
mischances.  Aided in the struggle by his devoted wife, who throughout
the years had bravely faced all dangers and hardships with him, he had
eventually accumulated a hard-won fortune.  In addition to the patronage
that he received from the local ranches, he conducted an extensive
business trading with the Indians from the big Reserve in the vicinity.
A man of essentially simple habits, through sentiment or ingrained
thriftiness, he disdained to abandon the routine and the scenes of his
former active life, although his bank-balance and his holdings in land
and stock probably exceeded that of many a more imposing city magnate.

The newcomers, disposing themselves comfortably upon various sacked
commodities, proceeded to smoke and casually inspect the voluble
stranger.  He was a tallish, well-built man nearing middle-age, with a
gray moustache, a thin beak of a nose, and a bleached-blue eyes.  He was
dressed in an old tweed suit, obviously of English cut, a pair of
high-heeled, spurred riding-boots and a cowboy hat.  Vouchsafing a brief
nod to the visitors he continued his conversation with MacDavid.

"Ya-as," he was drawling, "one of the most extraordinary shots you ever
heard of, Morley!  I was between the devil and the deep sea--properly.
There was the bear--rushing me at the double and there was the cougar
perched growling up on the rock behind me.  I made one jump sideways and
let the bear have it--slap through the brain, and . . . that same shot,
sir, ricocheted up the face of the rock and killed the cougar--just as he
was in the act of springing!  By George, y'know, it was one of the
swiftest things that ever happened!"

A tense silence succeeded the conclusion of this thrilling narrative.

MacDavid re-lit his pipe and puffed thoughtfully awhile.  "Eyah," he
remarked reminiscently, "feller does run up against some swift
propositions now an' again.  I mind one time I was headin' home from
Kananaskis, an' a bear jumped me from behind a fallen log.  The lever of
me rifle jammed so, all I could do was to beat it--in a hurry--an' I sure
did hit th' high spots, you bet!  It was in th' early spring an' th' snow
still lay pretty deep, but--I'd got a twenty yards start of that bear,
an' I finally beat him to it an' made my get-away."

The stranger whistled incredulously.  "Wha-a-tt!" he almost shouted,
"D'ye mean to tell me that bear got within twenty yards of you and
couldn't catch you?  Why, man!  It's incredible!"

"Fact," replied MacDavid calmly, knocking the ashes out of his pipe, "It
was this way: It was near th' edge of th' bush where th' bear first
jumped me, an'--just as we hit th' open ground--one o' them warm Chinook
winds sprung up behind us, travellin' east. . . .

"Man!" He paused impressively.  "The way that wind started in to melt th'
snow was a corker--just like lard in a fryin'-pan.  But--I just managed
to keep ahead of it an' while I had a good, hard surface of snow to run
on, the bear--why he was sloppin around in th' slush in my wake--couldn't
get a firm foothold, I guess. . . ."

His keen blue orbs stared full into the bleached ones of his vis-à-vis.

"I figure that there Chinook an' me an' th' bear must have been all
travellin' 'bout th' same line of speed--kind of swift.  After a mile or
two of it, th' bear--he got fed up an' quit cold," he ended gravely.
"Why--what's your hurry, Fred?"

But that individual, feebly raising both arms with a sort of hopeless
gesture, suddenly grabbed up his mail and beat a hasty retreat to his
horse.

The hoof-beats died away and MacDavid turned to the grinning policemen.
"Fred Storey," he said, in answer to their looks of silent enquiry.
"Runs th' R.U. Ranch, out south here.  Not a bad head, but"--he sighed
deeply--"he's such an ungodly liar.  I can't resist gettin' back at him
now an' again--just for luck.  He's up here on a visit--stayin' with th'
Sawyers."

"H-mm!" ejaculated Yorke, "seems to me I've got a hazy recollection of
meeting up with that fellow before--somewhere.  In a hotel in High River,
I think it was.  Beggar was yarning about Cuba, I remember."

"Bet it was hazy all right," was Redmond's sarcastic rejoiner, "like most
of your bar-room recollections, Yorkey."  He gave vent to a snorting
chuckle.  "That 'D'you know?  Ya! ya!' accent of his reminds me of that
curate in 'The Private Secretary.'  I saw it played to Toronto, once."

At this juncture the door opened, and a trio of Indians padded softly
into the store with gaily-beaded, moccasined feet.  Two elderly bucks and
a young squaw.  The latter flashed a shy, roguish grin at the white men,
and then with the customary effacement of Indian women withdrew to the
rear of the store.  Squatting down, all huddled-up in her blanket, she
peered at them with the incurious, but all-seeing stare of her tribe.
George got an impression of beady black eyes and a brown, rounded,
child-like face framed in a dazzling yellow kerchief.

The two bucks, with a momentary gleam of welcome wrinkling their
ruthless, impassive features, exchanged a salutation with MacDavid in
guttural Cree, which language the latter spoke fluently.  They were
clothed in the customary fashion of their tribe--with a sort of
blanket-capote garment reaching below the knee, their lower limbs swathed
in strips of blanket, wound puttee-wise.  Battered old felt hats
comprised their head-gear, below which escaped two plaited pig-tails of
coarse, mane-like, black hair, the latter parted at the nape of the neck
and dangling forward down their broad chests.

Slavin and Yorke hailed them familiarly.  The elder buck rejoiced in the
sonorous title of "Minne-tronk-ske-wan," but divers convictions for
insobriety under the Indian Liquor Act, and the facetious tongue of
Yorke, had contorted this into the somewhat opprobrious nickname of "Many
Drunks."  His companion was known as "Sun Dog."

They now proceeded to shake hands all around.  "How!  Many Drunks!"
shouted Yorke.  Pointing to Redmond, he added "oweski skemoganish" (new
policeman).  With a ferocious grin, intended for an ingratiating smile of
welcome, Many Drunks advanced upon George, with outstretched hand.  In a
rapid aside Yorke said: "Listen, Reddy, to what he says, he only knows
six or seven words of English, but he's as proud as Punch of 'em--always
likes to get 'em off on a stranger.  Don't laugh!"

Within a pace of Redmond that gentleman halted.  "How!" he grunted, and,
pausing impressively drew himself up and tapped his inflated chest,
"Minne-tronk-ske-wan! . . . great man!--me--"

And then Redmond nearly choked, as Many Drunks, with intense gravity,
proudly conferred upon himself the most objectionable title that exists
in four words of the English language--rounding that same off with a
majestic "Wah! wah!"

Turning, George beheld himself the target of covert grins from the
others, who evidently were familiar with Many Drunks' linguistic
attainments.  Sun Dog merely uttered "How!  Shemoganish."  He did not
profess ability to rise to the occasion like his companion.

Yorke, who was evidently in one of his reckless, rollicking moods,
proceeded to make certain teasing overtures to Many Drunks.  His
knowledge of Cree being nearly as limited as that worthy's knowledge of
English, he enlisted the aid of MacDavid as interpreter.  The dialogue
that ensued was something as follows:

"Tell him I'm fed up with the Force and am thinking seriously of going to
live on the reserve--_monial nayanok-a-weget_--turn 'squaw-man'--'take
the blanket.'"

MacDavid translated swiftly, received the answer, and turned to Yorke.
"He says '_Aie-ha_! (yes) You make good squaw-man.'"

"Ask him--if I do--if he'll _muskkatonamwat_ (trade) me the young lady
over in the corner there, for two bottles of _skutiawpwè_ (whiskey)."

"He says '_Nemoyah_!' (no)--if he does that, you'll turn around and
_kojipyhôk_ (arrest) him for having liquor in his possession."

"Tell him--_Nemoyah_!  I won't."

"He says _Aie-hat ekwecè_!  (Yes, all right) you can have her.  Says
she's his brother's wife's niece.  But he says you must give him the two
bottles of _skutiawpwè_ first, though."

The object of these frivolous negotiations had meanwhile covered her head
with the blanket, from the folds of which issued shrill giggles.  Sun
Dog, who had been listening intently with hand scooped to ear (he was
somewhat deaf), now precipitated himself into the discussion.  Violently
thrusting his elder companion aside he commenced to harangue MacDavid in
an excited voice and with vehement gestures of disapprobation of the
whole proceedings.  The trader translated swiftly:

"He says _Nemoyah_!--not to give the bottles to Many Drunks, as when he
gets full of _skutiawpwè_ he raises hell on th' reserve, an' there's no
livin' with him.  Says he beats up his squaw an' starts in to scalp th'
dogs an' chickens."

"Shtop ut!" bawled Slavin, "d'ju hear, Yorkey? . . . shtoolin' th'
nitchie on tu commit a felony an' th' like, thataways!"  He sniffed
disgustedly.  "_Skutiawpwè_ an' squaws! . . . blarney me sowl! but ye've a
quare idea av a josh.  'Tis a credit y'are tu th' Ould Counthry, an' no
error.  I do not wondher ye left ut."

"Sh-sh!" said that gentleman soothingly, "coarsely put, Burke! coarsely
put! . . .  Say Wine and Women, guv'nor!  Wine and Women!  If you were in
India, Burke, they'd make you Bazaar-Sergeant--put you in charge of the
morals of the regiment.  Both items are all right--always providing you
don't get a lady like Misthress Lee for a chaser.  How'd you like to be
in Nick's shoes?  What 'shteps' would you take?"

Slavin stared at his tormentor, blankly, a moment.  "Shteps?" he
ejaculated sharply, "fwhat shteps?" . . .  He leant back with a fervent
sigh and softly rubbed his huge hands together.  "Long wans, avick! . . .
eyah, d----d long wans, begorrah!"

Many Drunks now realizing that he was merely the victim of a joke,
scowled in turn upon Yorke.  Muttering something to MacDavid he backed up
against the wall and, squatting down, proceeded philosophically to fill
his pipe.

"What's that he said?" queried Yorke of the interpreter, "I couldn't
catch it."

The latter grinned.  "He says--of all the white men he's ever met in his
time, Stamixotokon[1] and my self are the only ones he's ever known to
tell th' truth."

"It's my belief the beggar'd flirt with Mrs. Lee, himself, if he only got
the chance" said Redmond laconically, "d'you recollect that day he picked
her parcel up for her--how nice she was to him?"

"Eyah," said Slavin darkly, "I remimber ut!  That man"--he darted an
accusing finger at Yorke--"wud thry tu come th' Don Jewan wid anything
wid a shkirrt on--from coast to coast.  _Flirrt_?  Yeh're tellin' th'
trute, bhoy, yeh're tellin' th' trute!  He'd a-made a good undhershtudy
for ould Nobby Guy, down Regina."

He settled himself comfortably and lit his pipe.  "Eyah, th' good ould
days, th' good ould days!" he resumed reminiscently, between puffs, "Hark
now till I tell ye th' tale av ould Nobby!"

"Is that the man they used to Josh about, down Regina?" enquired Redmond.
"Used to say 'I'm a man of few words'?"

Slavin nodded affirmatively.  "That's him, Sarjint in charrge av th' town
station he was--years back.  This is--whin I was Corp'ril at
headquarthers.  A foine big roosther av a man was Nobby, wid a mighty
pleasant way wid um--'specially wid th' ladies.  Wan night--blarney me
sowl!  Will I iver forghet ut?  Nobby 'phones up th' Gyard-room
reporthin' th' Iroquois Hotel on fire, an' requestin' th' O.C. for a
shquad av men tu help fight ut, an' kape th' crowd back.  So down we
wint, a bunch av us.  It sure was a bad fire all right.  No lives was
lost, but th' whole shebang was burnt tu th' ground.  Kapin' th' crowd
back was our hardest job.  Du fwhat we cud, we cud not make some av th'
silly fules kape back clear av th' danger-zone--wimmin an' all, bedad!

"By and by, a section av the wall tumbles an' quite a bunch av people got
badly hurt--Nobby amongst thim.  We dhragged thim out as quick as we cud
an' laid them forninst th' wall av a buildin' near-by--awaithin' some
stretcher-bearers.  Nobby'd got his leg bruk, but he seemed chipper
enough an' chewed th' rag wid us awhile.  Next tu him was a
wumman--cryin' something pitiful--she'd got her leg bruk, tu.  Nobby
rised him up on his elbow an' lukked at her.

"Now, 'tis powerful dhry wurrk, bhoys, fightin' fire, an' may be
Nobby--well, I cannot account for ut otherwise--him havin' th' nerve' tu
du' fwhat he did--onless p'raps 't'was just th' natch'ril
tindher-hearthedness av th' man--thryin' for tu comfort her.  Afther that
wan luk tho', Nobby he 'comes tu th' halt,' so tu shpake, an' 'marks
time' awhile considherin'--for becod, she was a harrd-lukkin ould
case--long beyant mark av mouth.

"Presintly, sez he: 'I'm a man av few wurrds!--'tis of then I have kissed
a _young_ wumman!'--an' he thwirls th' big buck moustache av um very
slow--'fwhy shud I not kiss an ould wan? . . .'--_an' he did_. . . .

"That's how th' man's throuble shtarted.  Brought ut all on umsilf.
Course at th' toime, fwhy! she slapped th' face av um an' called um all
manner av harrd names--but, all th' same! she must have liked ut, for
while they was convalescin' she was everlashtingly sendhin Nobby notes
an' flowers an' such like.  But for all that Nobby wud have no thruck wid
her, for all she was a widder, well fixed--wid a house av her own an'
lashuns av money.  Whin they was both out av hospital she was afther urn
again, an' du fwhat he cud he cud not shake that wumman.

"Th' ind av ut was, Nobby reports sick, an' th' reg'minthal docthor, ould
'Knockemorf' Probyn, gives um th' wance over.  He luks over some papers
an' sez he: 'A change an' a rist is fwhat yu' need, Sarjint Guy.  There's
a dhraft leavin' next week for Herschell Island[2]--I think I will mark
yu up fur ut.'

"'_Herschell Island_?' sez pore Nobby, an' wid that he let's out a howl.

"'Tut, tut!' sez ould Knockemorf, who was wise tu th' man's throuble.
'Tis safer off there'll yu'll be, man, than here, I'm thinkin'.'

"He was shtandin' by th' Gyard-room gate that day-week whin th' dhraft
marched out on their way tu enthrain--Nobby amongst thim.  'Good-bye,
Docthor!' he calls out, tears in th' eyes av um, ''Tis sendhin me tu me
grave y'are, God forgive yez!'

"'Nonsince!' shouts Knockemorf.  'Say yeh prayers an' kape yeh bowils
opin, me man, an' ye will take no harrm!'

"Some sind-off! well!--time wint on, an' wan day I gets a letther from me
ould friend, Ginger Johnson, who was stationed there tu, tellin' me all
th' news.  Nobby, sez he, was doin' fine, fat as a hog, an' happy as a
coon in a melun patch.  Wan day, sez he, a buck av th' name av Wampy
Jones comes a runnin' inta th' Post, wid th' face av a ghost an' th' hair
av um shtickin shtraight up.  Said a Polar bear'd popped out forninst a
hummock an' chased um--like tu th' tale av Morley, here.  Nobby, sez
Johnson, on'y grins at th' man, an' sez he: 'That's nothin'!'  An' thin
he shtarts in tellin' thim all 'bout this widder at Regina."


[1] Note by Author--The late Colonel Macleod, who for many years was
Commissioner of the R.N.W.M. Police.  He was greatly respected and
trusted by all the Indian tribes.

[2] Note by Author--This island is in the Arctic Circle.  The most
northerly post of the R.N.W.M. Police.




CHAPTER XI

  Methought I heard a voice cry,
  "Macbeth shall sleep no more!"
                           MACBETH


The sergeant's story evoked a general laugh from his hearers.  He arose
and knocked the ashes out of his pipe.  "Come on, bhoys!" said he.
"Let's beat ut.  Morley here's a respectable married man--we've bin
demoralisin' him an' his store long enough, I'm thinkin'."

Pocketing his packet of mail he and his subordinates stepped to the door,
MacDavid casually following them outside.  Tethered to the hitching-post,
they noticed, were the team of scare-crow cayuses belonging to Sun Dog
and Many Drunks.

"Poor beggars look as if a turn-out on the range wouldn't do them any
harm," remarked Redmond.

The thud of hoof-beats suddenly fell upon their ears and, turning, they
beheld Gully on his gray horse loping past them, about twenty yards
distant.  Apparently in a hurry, he merely waved to them and rode on,
heading in the direction of his ranch.  And then occurred a startling,
sinister incident which no man there who witnessed it ever forgot.

Suddenly, with the vicious instinct of Indian curs, three dogs which had
been sprawling in the shade of the dilapidated wagon-box sprang forward
simultaneously in a silent, savage dash at the horse's heels.  The
nervous animal gave a violent jump, nearly unseating its rider, who
pitched forward onto the saddlehorn.

They heard his angry, startled oath, and saw him jerk his steed up and
whirl about, then, quick as conjuring, came a darting movement of his
right hand between the lapels of his coat and a pistol-barrel gleamed in
the sun.

The curs, by this time, were flying back to the shelter of the wagon-box,
but ere they reached it--crack! crack! crack! three shots rang out in
quick succession, and three lumps of quivering canine flesh sprawled
grotesquely on the prairie.

The startled spectators stared aghast.  Startled--for, though all of them
there were more or less trained shots, such swift, deadly gunmanship as
this was utterly beyond their imaginations.  Gully had made no pretence
at aiming.  With a snapping action of his wrist he had seemed to
literally fling the shots at the retreating dogs.  It was the practised
whirl and flip of the finished gun-man.

No less astounding was the uncanny legerdemain displayed in drawing from
and replacing the weapon in its place of concealment.  The Indians,
attracted from the store by the sounds of shooting, began gabbling and
gesticulating affrightedly, but when MacDavid spoke to them sharply in
Cree they retreated inside again.

Some distance away, glaring at the dead dogs, the justice sat in his
saddle, and from beneath his huge moustache he spat a volley of most
un-magisterial oaths, delivered in a snarling, nasal tone foreign to the
ears of his listeners.  A minute or so he remained thus, then his baleful
eyes met the steady, meaning stare of the motionless quartette and his
face changed to a blank, irresolute expression.  He made a motion of
urging his horse forward, then, checking it abruptly, he wheeled about,
loping away in his original direction.

The trader was the first one to find his voice.  "Well, my God!" he
ejaculated.  "Did you ever see th' like o' that?"

His companions remained curiously silent.  "Gully!" he continued, with
vibrating voice, "whoever'd a-thought that that drawlin' English dude
could shoot like that? . . .  Fred Storey should have been here. . . ."
Still getting no response to his remarks he glanced up wonderingly.  The
three policemen were staring strangely at each other, and something in
their expression startled him.

"Eh!  Why!  What's up?" he queried sharply.

Then Slavin spoke grimly.  "Let's go luk at thim dogs," was all he
vouchsafed.

They stepped forward and inspected the carcasses critically.  "Fifty
yards away, if he was a foot!" said Redmond, "and he dropped them in one!
two! three! . . ."

"Slap through the head, too!" muttered Yorke.  "Burke!"--he added
suddenly.  Slavin met his eye with a steady, meaning stare; then, at
something he read in his subordinate's face, the sergeant's deep-set orbs
dilated strangely and he swung on his heel.

"Aye!" he ejaculated with an oath "I was forghettin' thim--come bhoys!
let's go luk for thim.  Shpread out, or we may miss the place."

"Empty shells," explained Yorke to the others, "automatic ejection--you
remember, Reddy!  We may find them."

Keeping a short distance apart, they sauntered forward, trying to recall
the spot Gully had shot from.  For awhile, with bent heads, they circled
slowly about each other, carefully scrutinizing the short turf.
Presently the trader uttered a low exclamation.  "Here's th' place!" he
said, pointing downwards.  The others joined him and they all gazed at
the cluster of deeply-indented hoof-marks, indicating where the horse had
propped and whirled about.

"Aha!" said Redmond, suddenly.

"Got ut?" queried Slavin.

For answer George dropped a small discharged shell into the other's
outstretched palm.  The sergeant made swift examination.  A shocking
blasphemy escaped him, and for an instant he jerked back his arm as if to
fling the article away, then, recovering himself with an effort, he
handed it to Yorke, who peered in turn.

The latter made a wry face.  "Hell!" he ejaculated disgustedly, "it's a
'Savage' this--thirty-two at that!"  He lowered his voice.  "The other
was a thirty-eight Luger--what?"

"Time an' agin," Slavin was declaiming in impotent rage and with upraised
fist,--"Time an' ag'in--have we shtruck a lead on this blasted case--on'y
tu find ut peter out agin. . . .  Oh! how long, O Lord? how long? . . ."

MacDavid stopped in turn.  "Here's th' other two, Sarjint," he said.
Slavin dropped the shells into his pocket and for a space he remained in
deep thought.  Then he turned to the trader.

"Morley," he said quietly, "yu're not a talker, I know,
but--anyways! . . .  I ask ye now . . . ye'll oblige me by shpakin' av
this tu no man--yet awhiles. . . .  I have me raysons--onnershtand?"

The eyes of the two men met, and question and answer were silently
exchanged in that one significant look.

MacDavid nodded brief acquiescence to the others request.  "Aye!" he
replied reflectively, "I think I do--now. . . ."

The sergeant turned to his men.  "Come on, bhoy!" he said.  "Let's beat
ut home.  I'm gettin' hungry."

They bid the trader adieu, and trudged away in the direction of the
detachment.  They had covered some quarter of a mile in silence when
Slavin, who was in the lead, suddenly halted and whirled on his
subordinates with a mirthless laugh.

"Windy Moran, begod!" he burst out, "mind fwhat he said that day 'bout
Gully an' that dep'ty sheriff bizness? . . . not so----'Windy' afther
all, I'm thinkin', eh?"

For some few seconds they stared at him, aghast.  They had forgotten
Moran.

"Say, Burke, though?" ejaculated Yorke incredulously.  "Good God! somehow
the thing seems impossible . . . not the 'sheriff' business so much . . .
the other--Gully!--a J.P.--a man of his class and standing! . . .  Why!
whatever motive--"

"He may have two guns," broke in Redmond.

"Eyah," agreed Slavin, grimly, "he may. . . .  A Luger's a mighty
diff'runt kind av a gun tu other authomatics . . . an' th' man that shot
Larry Blake ain't likely tu be fule enough tu risk packin' ut around--for
a chance tu thrip um up some day."

For awhile the trio cogitated in silence; each man striving desperately
to arrive at some logical solution to the extraordinary problem that now
faced them.

"Bhoys!" said Slavin presently, "there's no doubt there is . . .
somethin' damnably wrong 'bout all this.  But, all th' same, fact
remains, ye cannot shtart in makin' th' Force a laughin' stock by
charrgin' a man av Gully's position wid murdher--widout mighty shtrong
evidence tu back ut.  An' sizin' things up--fwhat have we got, afther
all, . . . right now . . . tu shwear out a warrant on? . . .  Nothin',
really, 'cept that he's shown us he's a bad man wid a gun!  A damned bad
break that was, tho', an' I'll bet he's sorry for that same, tu.  Mind
how he kept on thravellin', widout comin' back tu shpake wid us?"

He shook his head slowly, in sinister fashion, and stared at their
troubled faces in turn.  "See here; luk," he resumed solemnly, with
lowered voice, "honest tu God, in me own mind I du believe he is th' man
that done ut."  He paused--"but provin' ut's a diff'runt matther.  We
must foller this up an' get some shtronger evidence yet--behfure we make
th' break."

Suddenly he uttered a hollow chuckle.  "Kilbride!" he ejaculated.  "Mind
his josh that day--'bout it might be me, or Gully?--an how Gully laughed,
tu, wid th' hand of um like this?"

Napoleonic fashion he thrust his huge fist between the buttons of his
stable-jacket.

"Yes, by gad!" said Yorke reflectively.  "I sure do, now.  And I'll bet
he had his right hand on his gun, too!  Force of habit, I guess, if he's
an ex-deputy-sheriff.  From what little he's dropped he's sure knocked
around some, I know.  Hard to say where, and what the beggar hasn't been
in his time.  This accounts for him being so blooming close about the
Western States.  It's always struck me as being queer, that, because,
say, look at the slick way he rides and ropes!  He's never picked that up
in five years over on this Side--and that's all he claims he's been in
Canada."

"Besides" chimed in Redmond, eagerly, "that yarn of his about that hobo
swiping his dough, Sergeant!  'Frame-up,' p'raps, . . . gave it to him
and told him to beat it? . . ."

"Aw, rot!" said Yorke, disgustedly.  He sniffed, with his peculiar
mannerism, "that's dime-novel stuff, Red.  D'ye think he'd be fool enough
to risk that, with the chances of the fellow being picked up any minute
and squealing on him?"  He was silent a moment.  "Rum thing, though," he
murmured, "the way that hobo did beat us to it."

"'Some lokil man,' sez Kilbride," remarked Slavin musingly.  "Just th'
last one ye'd think av suspectin'.  An' Gully, begod, sittin' right
there! . . . talk 'bout nerve! . . ."

"But, good heavens!" burst out Yorke.  "Whoever would have suspected
him?"  He laughed a trifle bitterly.  "It's all very well for us to turn
round now and say 'what fools we've been,' and all that.  If we'd have
been the smart, 'never-make-a-mistake' Alecks, like we're depicted in
books, why, of course we'd have 'deducted' this right-away, I suppose?
Oh, Ichabod!  Ichabod!  An Englishman, too, by gad!  I'll forswear my
nationality."

"Whatever could he have on Larry, though?" was Redmond's bewildered
query.  "Say, that sure was a hell of a trick of his--using Windy's
horse--while the two of them were scrapping--trying to frame it up on
him!"

"Eyah," soliliquised the sergeant sagely.  "'Twill all come out in th'
wash.  Whin cliver, edjucated knockabouts like Gully du go bad; begob,
they make th' very wurrst kind av criminals.  They kin pass things off
wid th' high hand an' kape their nerve betther'n th' roughnecks--ivry
toime.

"Think av that terribul murdherer, Deeming--an' thim tu
docthors--Pritchard an' Palmer, colludge men, all av thim.  An' not on'y
men, but wimmin, tu.  'Member Mrs. Maybrick?  All movin' in th' hoighth
av society!"

He was silent a moment, then his face fell.  "I must take a run inta th'
Post an' see th' O.C. 'bout this," he resumed.  "Tis an exthornary case.
There's just a possibility we may be all wrong--jumphin' at conclusions
tu much.  Th' ould man! . . .  I think I can see th' face av um.  He'll
shling his pen across th' Ord'ly-room.  'Damn th' man!  Damn th' man!'
he'll cry.  'Go you now an' apprehend um on suspicion thin!  Fwhy shud I
kape a dog an' du me own barkin'?' An' thin he'll think betther av ut an'
chunt 'Poppycock, all poppycock! . . .  As you were, Sarjint'--an' thin
he'll call in Kilbride.  Eh! fwhat yez laughin' at, yeh fules?" he
queried irritably.

In spite of the gravity of the situation, the expression on their
superior's cadaverous face just then--its droll mixture of apprehension
and perplexity was more than Yorke and Redmond could stand.  Awhile they
rocked up against each other--a trifle hysterically; it was the reaction
to nerves worked up to a pitch of intense excitement.

"Yez gigglin' idjuts!" growled Slavin.  "Come on, let's get home!  No use
us shtandin here longer--gassin' like a bunch av ould washer-wimmin full
av gin an' throuble."

In silence they trudged on to the detachment.  "'Ome, sweet 'ome! be it
never so 'umble!" quoth Yorke, as they reached their destination, "Hullo!
who's this coming along?"  Shading his eyes with his hand he gazed down
the trail.  "Looks like Doctor Cox and Lanky."

The trio stared at the approaching buckboard which contained two
occupants.  "Sure is," said Redmond, "out to some case west of here, I
suppose."

They hailed the physician cheerily, as presently he drew up to the
detachment.  "Fwhere away, Docthor?" queried Slavin.  "Will ye not shtop
an' take dinner wid us, yu' an' Lanky?  'Tis rarely we see yez in these
parts now."

"Eh, sorry!" remarked that gentleman, climbing out of the rig and
stretching his cramped limbs, "got to get on to Horton's, though.  One of
their children's sick.  Thanks, all the same, Sergeant."  Glancing round
at his teamster he continued in lowered tones, "There's a little matter
I'd like to speak to you fellows about."

"Sure!" agreed Slavin, quickly.  "Come inside thin, Docthor."

The party entered the detachment and, seating themselves, gazed
enquiringly at their visitor.  For a space he surveyed them reflectively,
a perturbed expression upon his usually genial countenance.  His first
words startled them.

"It's about your J.P., Mr. Gully," he began.  "This incident, mind, is
closed absolutely--as far as he and I are concerned; but, under the
circumstances, which to say the least struck me as being mighty peculiar,
I--well! . . .  I don't think it's any breach of medical etiquette on my
part telling you about it.

"For some time past now I've been treating Gully for insomnia.  Man first
came to me seemingly on the verge of a nervous breakdown through it.

"I prescribed him some pretty strong opiates--strong as I dare--and for a
time he seemed to get relief.  But a couple of days ago he came around
and--my God! . . .  Say! if I hadn't known him for a man who drinks very
little I'd have sworn he was in the D.T.'s."

The doctor's rotund figure stiffened slightly in his seat, and his genial
face hardened to a degree that was in itself a revelation to his
audience.  Without any semblance of bravado he continued quietly, "I hope
I possess as much physical pluck as most men--I guess you fellows aren't
aware of it, but many years back I too wore the Queen's uniform--Surgeon
in the Navy.  I served in that Alexandria affair, under Charlie Beresford.

"Well, as I was saying, . . .  Gully came into my surgery that day,
raving like a madman.  He's a big, powerful devil, as you know.  I'll
confess I was a bit dubious about him--watched him pretty close for a few
minutes, for he acted as if he might start running amok.  'I can't
sleep!' he kept yelling at me, 'I can't sleep, I tell you! . . .  That
dope you're giving me's no good. . . .  Christ Almighty! give me a shot
of cocaine, Cox, or morphine, and get me a supply of the stuff and a
needle, will you?  I'll pay you any amount!'

"Naturally, I refused, I'm not the man to go laying myself open to
anything like that.  Well!  Good God!  The next minute the man came for
me like a lunatic--clutching out at me with those great hands of his and
with the most murderous expression on his face you can imagine.  I backed
away to the medicine cabinet and caught hold of a pestle and told him I'd
brain him with it if he touched me.  I threatened I'd lay an information
against him for assault, and that seemed to quiet him down.  He began to
expostulate then, and eventually broke down and apologised to me--in the
most abject fashion.  Begged me to overlook his loss of control, and all
that.  Of course I let up on him then.  A local scandal between two men
in our position wouldn't do at all.  I gave him a d----d good calling
down, though, and finally advised him to go away somewhere for a complete
rest and change.  But he wouldn't agree to that--seemed worried over his
ranch.  Said he'd worked up a pretty good outfit and couldn't think of
leaving his stock in somebody else's hands at this time of the
year--couldn't afford it in fact.  Anyway--that's his look-out.  But, as
a matter of fact, if that man doesn't take my advice, why . . . he's
going to collapse.  I know the symptoms only too well.  That's the curse
of men living alone on these homesteads--brooding, and worrying their
heads off.  It seems to get them all eventually in--"

Breaking off abruptly he glanced at his watch.  "Getting late!" he
ejaculated, jumping up, "I must be getting on to that case."

"Docthor!" said Slavin, reflectively, "'tis a shtrange story ye've been
tellin' us.  Ye'll be comin' back this way, I suppose--lather in th' day?"

The physician nodded.

"I'd like fur ye tu dhrop in agin, thin," continued the sergeant slowly,
"if ye have toime?  There's a little matther I wud like tu dishcuss wid
yu'--'tis 'bout that same man."

Doctor Cox glanced sharply at the speaker's earnest, sombre face.  A
certain sinister earnestness underlay the simple words, and it startled
him.

"Very good, Sergeant!" he agreed, "I'll call in on my way back.  Well!
good-by, all of you, for the time being!"

They followed him outside and watched the rig depart on its journey
westward.  It was Redmond who broke the long silence.

"Well, sacred Billy!  What do you know about that?" he ejaculated tensely.

And the trio turned and looked upon each other strangely, their faces
registering mutual wonderment and conviction.

"Sleep?" murmured Yorke, "No, by gum! . . . no more could Macbeth, with
King Duncan and Banquo on his chest o' nights! . . .  Well, that settles
it!"

But Slavin made a gesture of dissent.  "As you were, bhoys!" was his
sober mandate.  "Sleeplishness's no actual proof . . . but it's a
pointer.  Th' iron's getthin' warrm--eyah! d----d warrm! . . . but we
cannot shtrike yet."




CHAPTER XII

  But a truce to this strain; for my soul it is sad,
  To think that a heart in humanity clad
  Should make, like the brutes, such a desolate end,
  And depart from the light without leaving a friend.
    Bear soft his bones over the stones!
    Though a pauper, he's one whom his Maker yet owns!
                                        "THE PAUPER'S DRIVE."


They ate dinner more or less in silence.  Slavin had relapsed into one of
his fits of morose taciturnity.  At the conclusion of the meal, Yorke and
Redmond drew a bench outside, and for awhile sat in the sun, smoking.

"He's got 'Charley-on-his-back' properly to-day," remarked the
sophisticated Yorke, with a sidelong jerk of his head, "old beggar's best
left alone, begad! when he' get's those fits on him."  He sniffed the
fresh air and gazed longingly out over the sunlit, peaceful landscape,
flooded with a warm, sleepy, golden haze of summer.  "Lord! but it's a
peach of a day" he continued, "say, gossip mine, did you think to get
that fishing-tackle at Martin's this morning?"

George nodded affirmatively.  Yorke rose and stepped indoors.  "Say,
Burke," he said persuasively, "there's not much doing this
afternoon--how's chances for me and Reddy going down to the Bend for a
bit?  The water looks pretty good just now.  You'll want to have a lone
chin with the Doctor, anyway, no use us sticking around."

The sergeant, engrossed in a crime-report, acceded gruffly to the
request.  "Run thim harses in first, tho'!" he flung after his
subordinate, "an' du not yu' men get tu far away down-shtream, in case I
might want yez."

"That's 'Jake,'" was Redmond's comment, a moment later, "no use trying
fly-fishing to-day, though, Yorkey--too bright.  We'd better fish deep.
Here, you get the rods all fixed up, and catch some grasshoppers, and
I'll chase out in the pasture and run the horses in."

Some half an hour later found them trudging down the long slope below the
detachment that led to the nearest point of the Bow River.  Here the
river described a sharp bend southward for some distance, ere resuming
its easterly course.  Arriving thither, they fished for awhile in
blissful content; their minds for the time-being devoid of aught save the
sport of Old Izaak.  Picking likely spots for deep casts, they meandered
slowly down-stream, keeping about twenty yards apart.  At intervals,
their piscatorial efforts were rewarded with success.  Four fine
"two-pounders" of the "Cut-Throat" species had fallen to Yorke's
rod--three to Redmond's.  Then, for a time the fish ceased to bite.

"Here!" said Yorke suddenly.  "I'm getting fed up with this!  I can't get
a touch.  There's a big hole farther down, just up above Gully's place.
Let's try it!  He and I pulled some good 'uns out of there, last year."

Eventually they reached their objective.  At this point the force of the
current had gradually, with the years, scooped out a large, semicircular
portion of the shelving bank.  Also, a spit of gravel-bar, jutting far
out into the water, had stranded a small boom of logs and drift-wood; the
whole constituting a veritable breakwater that only a charge of dynamite
could have shifted.  In the shelter of this and the hollowed-out bank, a
huge, slow eddy of water had formed, apparently of great depth.

As Yorke had advertised it--it did look like a likely kind of a hole for
big trout.  "You wouldn't think it," said he now, "but there's twenty
feet of water in that pot hole."  He put down his rod and slowly began to
fill his pipe.  "You can have first shot at it, Red," he remarked, "I'll
be the unselfish big brother.  You ought to land a good 'un out of there.
Aha! what'd I tell you?"

Redmond's gut "leader" had barely sunk below the surface when he felt the
thrilling, jarring strike of an unmistakably heavy fish.  The tried,
splendid "green-heart" rod he was using described a pulsating arc under
the strain.  He turned to Yorke gleefully.  "By gum! old thing, I've sure
got one this time," he said, "bet you he's ten pound if he's an ounce.
Hope the line'll hold!"

Simultaneously they uttered an excited exclamation, as a huge, silvery
body darted to the surface, threshed the water for the fraction of a
second, and then dived.

"Look out!" cried Yorke.  "Give him line, Red, give him line!  Play him
careful now, or you'll lose him!"

The reel screeched, as Redmond let the fish run.  Then--without
warning--the line slacked and the rod straightened.  George, giving vent
to a dismayed oath, reeled in until the line tautened again, and the
point of the rod dipped.

"What's up?" queried Yorke, "he's still on, isn't he?"

"Yes," growled Redmond miserably, "feels as if I'm snagged though.  He's
there right enough--I can feel him jumping.  Damnation!  That's the worst
of stringing three hooks on your leader.  One of 'em's snagged on
something below, I guess.  Here! hold the rod a minute, Yorkey!"

The latter complied.  George unbuttoned and threw off his stable-jacket
and began taking off his boots.  Yorke contemplated his comrade's actions
in speechless amazement.  "Why, what the devil?--" he began--

"I'm not going to lose that fish," mumbled Redmond sulkily, as he threw
off his clothes, "I'll get him by gum! if I have to dive to the depths of
Hell."

"Say, now! don't be a fool!" cried Yorke, "that water's like ice, man!
You'll get cramped, and then the two of us'll drown.  We-ll, of all the
idiots!--"

George, by this time stripped to the buff, crept gingerly to the edge of
the shelving bank.  In his right hand he grasped--opened--a small
pen-knife.  "Aw, quit it!" he retorted rudely, "I'll only be under a
minute--hold the line taut--straight up and down, Yorkey, so's I can see
where to dive."

He drew a deep breath, and then, with the poise of a practised swimmer,
dived--cutting the water with barely a splash.  For the space of a
half-minute Yorke stared apprehensively at the swirling eddy, beneath
which the other had vanished.  The line still remained taut.  Then he
gave a gasp of relief, as Redmond's head re-appeared, and that young
gentleman swam to the side.  Extending a hand, the senior constable
lugged his comrade to terra firma.

"That's good!" he ejaculated fervently.  "D----n the fish, anyway!  I
guess you couldn't make--"  He broke off abruptly, and remained staring
at the dripping George with startled eyes.  The latter's face registered
unutterable horror, and he shook as with the ague.  Speech seemed beyond
him.  He could only mouth and point back to the gloomy depths whence he
had just emerged.

"Here!" cried Yorke, with an oath, "whatever is the matter, Reddy?  Man!
you look as if you'd seen a ghost!"

Then his own face blanched, as the shivering George bubbled incoherently,
"B-b-body! b-b-body!  My God, Yorkey!  th-there's a s-s-stiff d-down
th-there!  Ugh! I d-d-dived right onto it!"

For a brief space they remained staring at each other; then, a strange
light of understanding broke over Yorke's face, and he made a snatch at
Redmond's clothes.  "Come!" he jerked out briskly.  "Get 'em on quick,
Red, else you'll catch your death of cold--never mind about drying
yourself--you can change when you get back."

In shivering silence his comrade commenced to struggle into his
underclothes and "fatigue-slacks."  Yorke snapped the line and reeled in
the slack.  "Stiff!" he kept ejaculating "stiff!  Yes, by gad! and I can
make a pretty good guess who that stiff is! . . .  Burke'll have all the
evidence he wants--now.  You beat it, Reddy, as soon as you're fit and
get him.  A run'll warm you up.  The grappling-irons are back of the
stable.  And say! tell him to bring a good long rope.  Lord, I hope
Doctor Cox hasn't left yet.  I'll stay here, Reddy.  Hurry up!"


An hour or so later, a morbidly expectant group gathered on the
river-bank.  Redmond, luckily, had reached the detachment just prior to
the coroner's departure, and that gentleman now comprised one of a party.
Slavin had hitched his team to a cotton-wood clump nearby, and was now
busily rigging the double set of three-pronged grappling-irons.  When all
was ready, he motioned to his companions to stand back, and then, with a
preliminary whirl or two, flung the irons into the pool, some distance
ahead of the spot indicated by Redmond.

Slowly and ponderously he began the dragging recover, with the muscular
skill of a man long inured to the gruesome business.  His first effort
was unsuccessful--weeds and refuse were all he salvaged.  He tried again,
with the same result.  Cast after cast proved futile.  After the last
failure he turned and glowered morosely upon Redmond.

"'Tis either dhrunk or dhramin' ye must be, bhoy!  There's nothin' there.
I've a good mind," he added slowly "a d----d good mind tu shove ye undher
arrest for makin' a friv'lus report tu yeh superior!"

Yorke now came to his comrade's rescue.  "By gum, Burke," he flashed out
"if you'd seen his mug when he came up out of that hole you wouldn't have
thought there was anything frivolous about it, I can tell you!"

Poor George voiced a vehement protest, in self defense.  "Good God,
Sergeant!" he expostulated, "d'you think I'd come to you with a yarn like
that?  I tell you it is there.  Have another try.  Sling farther over to
the right here!"

Grumblingly, the latter complied, and began the slow recover.  Suddenly,
the rope checked.  Slavin strained a moment, then he turned around to the
expectant group.  "Got ut'" he announced grimly.  "I can tell by th' feel
av ut.  Tail on tu th' rope there, all av yez!  Now!  Yeo!  Heave ho!"

Like a tug of war team they all bowed their backs and strained with all
their might; but their efforts proved futile.  "Vast heavin!" said
Slavin, breathing heavily.  "'Tis shtuck somehow--I will have tu get th'
team an' double-trees.  Get a log off'n that breakwater, bhoys, so's th'
rope will not cut inta th' edge av th' bank."

He crossed over to the horses.  "Now!" said he, some minutes later, as he
backed up the team and made all fast to the double-trees.  "Yu', Reddy,
an' Lanky, guide th' rope over th' log.  Yu', Yorkey, get th' feel av ut,
an' give me th' wurrd.  I du not want to break ut."

Yorke leant over the edge of the bank, loosely feeling the rope.  "All
right!" he announced.

Slavin, edging his team cautiously forward, and taking the strain to
avoid a violent jerk, clucked to them.  With a scramble, and a steady
heave of their powerful hind-quarters, they started.

With bated breath the watchers gazed at the rope--creeping foot by foot
out of the discoloured water.

"Keep a-going!" Yorke shouted to Slavin.  "It's coming up, all right!"

It came.  Arising slowly and sullenly out of the depths they beheld a
horrible, dripping, shapeless something that eventually resolved itself
into a human body--clothed in torn rags and matted with river-refuse.

Then, to the salvagers, came the most astounding and sinister revelation
of all.  Startled oaths burst from them as they beheld now what had
retarded their first pull.  Bound tightly to the body with rusted wire
was a huge, hand-squared block of stone.  The sergeant's last and
successful cast had resulted in two prongs of the grappling-irons
catching in the enveloping wire.

Slowly and cautiously the whole hideous bulk was finally drawn up the
shelving bank and over the log and onto dry ground.  Yorke shouted, and
Slavin, checking the horses, detached the rope from the double-trees.
Handing the lines over to Lanky Jones he joined the others, who were
critically examining their gruesome catch.  To their surprise, although
the features were unrecognisable, the corpse was not so decomposed as
they had first imagined, the ice-cold water having preserved it to a
certain extent.  Still firmly hooked to the rags of clothing--a
ludicrously grim joke--was the huge jumping, gasping trout which Redmond
had struck and lost.

Suddenly Yorke uttered a low exclamation.  "Burke!  Burke!" he said
tensely, "there you are! . . . Look at the right hand'"

The eyes of all were centered on the grimy, stiffened, clawlike fist.
They saw that two of the fingers were missing.  An exultant oath burst
from Slavin.  "By G----!" he said, with grim conviction, "it's him all
right!--that pore hobo shtiff--Dick Drinkwater.  Eyah! fwhat's in a name?
Fwhat's in a name?"  He pointed to the grinning jaws.  "Luk at th' gold
teeth av um, tu!" he added.

The coroner was examining the almost fleshless skull.  He gave a cry of
anger and dismay.  "Good God!" he gasped.  "Look here, all of you! . . .
This man's been shot through the head, too!"  He indicated the small,
circular orifice in the occiput, and its egress below the left eye.

"Only an exceedingly powerful, high-pressure weapon could have done
that," he continued significantly, "both holes are alike--bullet hasn't
'mushroomed' at all."

"Eyah!" Slavin agreed wearily.  "We know fwhat kind av a gun did ut.  And
luk here!" he added savagely, pointing to the bare feet, "here's another
of Mr. Man's little jokes--no boots.  If they'd have been lift on they'd
have shtuck tighter'n glue--in that water.  Reddy was 'bout right,
Yorkey!  Gully, d----n him! did frame us that day.  Must have used thim
himsilf tu make thim thracks wid--early in th' mornin'--behfure he met up
wid us on th' thrail.  Oh, blarney my sowl!  Yes!  Had us chasin' for a
whole silly week, all for--"

He broke off abruptly, choking with rage.  For awhile, in silence, the
party gazed at the pitiful, hideous monstrosity that had once been a man.
Then the ever-practical Redmond proceeded, with the aid of a large
pebble, to burst, strand by strand, the wire which bound the stone to the
body.

"That stone, too!" said the doctor darkly.  "Sergeant, in view of what
you've been telling me, there seems something very, very terrible about
all this.  I suppose there's absolutely no doubt in your mind now, who--?"

The Irishman jerked out a great oath.  "Doubt!" echoed he grimly, "doubt!
So little doubt, Docthor," added he hoarsely, "that we go get 'um this
very night."

"Alas, poor Yorick!" said Yorke sadly.  "Say, Burke!" he continued in an
awe-struck voice "this is like a leaf out of O'Brien's book, with a
vengeance.  You remember him, that cold-blooded devil who Pennycuik
nailed up in the Yukon--used to shoot 'em and shove their bodies under
the ice?"

Slavin nodded gloomily.  "At Tagish, ye mane?  Yeah!  I 'member ut.
Penny sure did some good wurrk on that case."

Redmond had by this time completed his gruesome task.  "There's lots of
these blocks lying around Gully's," he remarked, "I've seen 'em.  Place's
got a stone foundation.  Look at the notches he's chipped in this one--to
keep the wire from slipping!"

"Eyah!" said Slavin, with grimly-unconscious humour, "Exhibit B.  We must
hang on to ut, heavy as it us--an' th' wire, tu!  Well, people, we'd
betther shove this pore shtiff on the buckboard, an' beat ut."  He turned
to the doctor's laconic factotum.  "Come on, Lanky!" he said briskly.
"Let's go hitch up."

Presently, when all was ready, Slavin took the lines and the coroner
climbed up beside him.  The rest of the party followed on foot.  A
sombre, strange little procession it looked, as it moved slowly westward
into the dusky blaze of a blood-red sunset.  In the hearts of the
policemen grim resolve was not unmixed with certain well-founded
forebodings, as they fully realized what a sinister, dangerous mission
lay ahead of them that night.




CHAPTER XIII

  'Twas then--like tiger close beset
  At every pass with toil and net,
  'Counter'd, where'er he turns his glare,
  By clashing arms and torches' flare,
  Who meditates, with furious bound,
  To burst on hunter, horse, and hound,--
  'Twas then that Bertram's soul arose,
  Prompting to rush upon his foes.
                                SCOTT


The old detachment clock struck nine wheezy notes.  Yorke and Redmond,
seated at a table busily engaged in cleaning their service revolvers,
glanced up at each other sombrely.

"Getting near time," muttered the former, "the moon should be up soon
now.  Lanky," he continued, addressing that individual who was sitting
nearby, "what are you and the Doctor going to do?  Going back to Cow Run
tonight, or what?"

"Don't think it," replied the teamster laconically.  He glanced towards
the open door and assumed a listening attitude.  "Th' Sarjint an' him's
out there now--chewin' th' rag 'bout it--hark to 'em!"

Ceasing their cleaning operations for a space, the two constables
listened intently to the raised voices without.  "No! no! no!" came
Slavin's soft brogue, in tones of vehement protest to something the
coroner had said, "I tell yu' 'tis not right, Docthor, that yu' shud run
such risk!  Wid us 'tis diff'runt--takin' th' chances av life an'
death--just ord'nary course av juty. . . ."

"Oh, tut! tut! nonsense, Sergeant," was the physician's brisk response.
"You forget.  I've taken those same chances before, too, and, by Jove! I
can take 'em again!  All things considered," he added significantly,
"seems to me--er--perhaps just as well I should be on hand."

Yorke and Redmond exchanged rueful grins.  "The old sport!" quoth the
latter admiringly.  "Damme, but I must say the Doc's game!"

"It's the old 'ex-service spirit'," said Yorke quietly, "rum thing!
Always seems to crop out, somehow, when there's real trouble on hand."

Nonchalantly puffing a huge cigar, the object of their remarks presently
strolled back into the room, followed by the sergeant.  "Behould th'
'last coort av appeal,' Docthor," began Slavin majestically.  With a
whimsical grin he indicated his subordinates.  "Bhoys," he explained,
"contrairy tu my wishes, th' Docthor insists on comin' wid us this night.
Now fwhat yez know 'bout that?"

"Tried to shake me!" supplemented that gentleman tersely, waving his
cigar at the last speaker.  "What's this court's ruling?"

A stern smile flitted over Yorke's high-bred features.  "Appeal
sustained," he announced decisively, "eh, Reddy?"

For answer, his comrade arose and silently wrung the doctor's hand; then,
without show of emotion, he resumed his seat and likewise his cleaning
operations.  Yorke, as silently, duplicated his comrade's actions.  The
ex-Naval surgeon said nothing; but his eyes glistened strangely as he
dropped into an easy chair and proceeded to envelope himself in a cloud
of smoke,

Suddenly the nasal voice of the teamster, Lanky Jones, made itself heard.
"How 'bout me?" he drawled, "ain't I in on this, too?  I kin look after
th' hawsses, anyways, fur yeh!"

"Arrah thin! hark tu um?" said Slavin, in mock despair.  "Docthor, 'tis a
bad example ye're setting All right, thin, Lanky, ye shall come, an' ye
wish ut.  An' as man tu man--I thank ye!  We will all go a 'moonlightin'
tugither.  Eyah!" he resumed reminiscently, "many's th' toime I mind me
ould father--God rist him!--tellin' th' tales av thim days, whin times
was harrd in Oireland, an' rints wint up an' th' pore was dhriven
well-nigh desprit.  How him an' his blood-cousin, Tim Moriarty, lay wan
night for an' ould rapparee av a landlord, who'd evicted pore Tim out av
house an' home.  Tim had an' ould blundherbuss, all loaded up wid bits av
nales an' screws an' such-like, wid a terribul big charrge av powther
behint ut.  Four solid hours did they wait for um--forninst a hedge on
th' road he had tu come home by, from Ballymeen Fair.

"By an' by they hears um a-comin . . . a-hollerin' an' laughin' tu
umsilf, an' roarin' an' singin' 'Th' Jug av Potheen.'  Full av ut, tu, by
token av th' voice av um.  Tim makes all ready wid th' blundherbuss.  All
av a suddint tho', th' tchune shtops, an' tho' they waits for um for
quite a toime, he niver shows up.  By an' by they gets fed up wid lyin'
belly-down in th' soakin' rain.  'H-mm! mighty quare!' sez me father, 'I
wonder fwhat's happened tu th' pore ould ginthleman?'  'Let us go luk for
um?' sez Tim, wid blood in his oi, ''tis may be he's on'y shtoppin' tu
take another dhrink out av th' jug.'

"So, up th' road they goes a piece, till they comes tu a bog at th' side
av ut.  An' there they finds um--head-first shtuck in th' bog--just th'
tu feet av um shtickin' out an' which boots Tim sez he can swear tu.
'Begorrah!' sez me father, 'that accounts for th' tchune shtoppin' so
suddint!  Let us luk for th' jug?'  Well, they hunts around for th' jug
awhile, but all they finds is his ould caubeen.  So they shtuck that on
wan of his feet, an' Tim, he pins th' warrant av evictmint tu ut,
currsin' somethin' fierce th' whiles bekase he was done out av getthin' a
shot at the 'ould rapparee wid th' blundherbuss."

Slavin shook his head slowly at the conclusion of the story.  "Eyah!" he
said wistfully, "many's th' toime have I heard me father tell that same
tale.  They must have been shtirrin' times, thim!"  In characteristic
fashion his mood suddenly changed.  His face hardened, as with upraised
hand he silenced the burst of laughter he had provoked from his hearers.
"Ginthlemen!" he resumed quietly, "we're none av us cowards here, but--no
need tu remind yu'--fwhat sort av a man we are goin' up against this
night."

Unconsciously he drew himself up, with an air of simple, rugged dignity
that well became his grim visage and powerful frame.  In that hour of
impending danger the brave, true, kindly heart of the man stood
revealed--a personality which endeared him to Yorke and Redmond beyond
any ties of friendship they had known.

Slowly he repeated, "we are none av us cowards here, but--remimber Larry
Blake, an' that pore hobo shtiff back in th' shed there.  An' remimber
thim dogs this mornin'.  We du not want tu undherrate um.  We du not want
tu cop ut like did Wilde, whin he wint tu arrest Charcoal; or Colebrook,
whin he tackled Almighty Voice.  Maybe he'll just come a-yawnin' tu th'
dhure, wid th' dhrawlin' English spache av um, sayin' 'Well, bhoys, an'
fwhat's doin'?'  An' yet again--may be he's all nerves afther th' bad
break he made in front av us this mornin'--expectin' us--eyah!--waithin',
watchin' belike, wid his gun in his fisht.  Luk at th' way he acted
afther his gun play--leery as hell. . . ."

"Yes!" said Yorke thoughtfully, "egad! there was something darned queer
in the way he acted, all right.  Guess we'd better take carbines along,
eh, Burke? . . . in case we get let in for a man hunt.  For all we know,
he may have beat it already.  Another thing--he may start in bucking us
about not having a warrant--just to gain time?"

Slavin met the other's suggestion with a grim nod of acquiescence.
"Shure! we'll take thim," he said, "but"--his jaw set ruthlessly--"if I
wanst get my grub-hooks on um . . . why! 'tis all up!--carbines, or no
carbines--warrant or no warrant.  Section thirty av th' Code covers th'
warrant bizness--in a case like this, anyways.  Come on, thin, bhoys,
saddle up!  An' Lanky!--yu give me a hand wid th' team! we must be
getthin'!"

Presently all was in readiness, and the small, well-armed party left the
detachment under the light of a brilliant three-quarter moon.  Slavin led
in the police buckboard, with the doctor seated beside him, and Lanky
Jones crouched behind them.  Yorke and Redmond rode in the rear, with
their carbines slung at the saddle-horn.  It was a hazardous mission they
were bound on, as they all fully realized now, knowing the terribly
ruthless character of the man they sought to apprehend.

Descending the grade which led to the bend of the river they swung due
east at a smart pace, following the winding Lower Trail.  This last road
ran past Gully's ranch, which lay some three miles distant.  As they
neared their objective the sergeant slackened his team down to a walking
pace.

Suddenly Redmond tongue-clucked to himself in absent fashion.  The sound
of it roused Yorke out of the sombre reverie into which he had fallen.

"What's up, Red?" queried he waggishly, in a low voice, "dreaming you're
taking that dive again, or what?"

"No!" muttered George abstractly in the same key.  "I was thinking what a
rum, unfathomable old beggar Slavin is.  Fancy him springing that comical
old yarn at such a time as this?"

"Ah!" murmured his comrade reflectively.  "When you come to know Burke as
well as I do you'll find he's generally got some motive for these little
things--blarney and all.  You laughed, didn't you?  Guess we all of us
gave the giddy 'ha! ha'.'  Felt quite chipper after it, too, the bunch of
us . . . well then?"

"Sh-sh!" came the sergeant's back-flung, guarded growl, "quit your gab
there!  We're gettin' nigh, bhoys--here's th' brush forninst his
place . . . must go mighty quiet an' careful now."

Looming up dark and forbidding ahead of them they beheld the all-familiar
sight of the huge, shadowy thicket of pine and Balm o' Gilead clumps that
fringed the west end of Gully's ranch.  Entering its gloomy depths, they
felt their way slowly and cautiously along the stump-dotted trail.  At
intervals, from somewhere overhead, came the weird, depressing hoot of a
long-eared owl, and, seemingly close at hand, the shrill, mocking
"ki-yip-yapping" of coyotes echoed sharply in the stillness of the night.
Stray patches of moonlight began to filter upon the party once more as
they gradually neared the end of the rough-hewn avenue; the thick growth
of pine giving place to scattered cotton-wood clumps.

Arriving at the verge of the timber the party halted.  There, some two
hundred yards distant, upon a patch of open ground partially encircled by
dense, willow-scrub, lay a ghostly-shadowed cluster of ranch buildings.
The living habitation itself stood upon a slightly raised knoll, hard
upon the river-bank.  To their nostrils the night air brought the strong,
not unpleasant scent of cattle, drifting up from the numerous recumbent
bovine forms which dotted the ground all around the ranch.

Awhile the party gazed speculatively at the habitation of him--the
undoubted perpetrator of the deadly deeds--for whom they had sought so
long.  The peaceful aspect of their moonlit surroundings suddenly smote
the minds of all with a strange sense of unreality, as full realization
of the sinister import of their errand came home to them.  In uncanny
telepathy with their disturbed feelings sounded the owl's derisive
hooting, and the persistent mocking raillery of the coyotes.

It was Slavin who broke the long, tense silence.  "Damn that 'Dismal
Jimmy' owl!" he ejaculated testily, in a low tone--"an' thim
ki-oots! . . . beggars all seem to be givin' us th' ha! ha! as if they
knew.  P'raps he has beat ut on us afther all? . . .  'Tis harrd tu
say--we cannot shpot a glim from this side--winders all face east.  Now!
luk a-here, all av yez!"  He turned to his companions with a grim,
determined face, his deep-set eyes glittering ominously in the light of
the moon.  "Lets get things cut-an'-dhried behfure we shtart in," he
whispered.  "Whin he knows th' jig's up--that's if he is in--he may act
like a man av sinse, an' agree tu come peaceable--but--" and Slavin shook
his head slowly--"if he refuses . . . fwhy? . . . 't'wud be straight
suicide tu attimpt tu rush um.  There's on'y wan dhure.  Hidin' in th'
dark there, wid that Luger gun av his coverin' ut, we'd shtand no show at
all.  He'd put th' whole bunch av us out av business--in as many shots,
behfure a man av us got a chance tu put fut inside.  Now, let's see!" he
murmured reflectively.  "Fwhat is th' lay av th' shack agin?  There's--"

"The door and two of the windows face east," interpolated Yorke,
softly--"living-room and kitchen--one window to the south--that's his
bed-room."

"Eyah! that's ut," whispered the sergeant, "now thin--Lanky--du yu' shtay
right here wid th' harses.  Kape yu're head--even if ye du hear shootin'.
Du not shtir from here onless ye get ordhers from wan av us."  Turning to
the others he continued in a sibilant hiss, "Yu, Reddy, shlip along th'
edge av th' brush here, an' over th' river-bank onto th' shingle.  Kape
well down an' thread careful ontil ye come forninst th' back winder.
Thin pop yu're head up circumshpict an' cover ut wid yu're carbine.  Use
good judgmint tho'; none av us want tu shtart in shootin' onless we're
forced tu ut.  Ondher th' circumstances 'tis best we thry an' catch um
alive."

For a moment Slavin stared after Redmond's crouching form, as his
subordinate disappeared in the gloom, "Thrust no harm comes tu th' lad,"
he muttered irresolutely, "quick as a flash is th' bhoy wid his head,
eyah! but he's inclined tu be over rash at toimes."

"Oh, he's all right," hissed Yorke reassuringly, "don't you get worrying
over him making any bad breaks, Burke.  He's as fly as they make 'em."

Presently the sergeant faced round with a dreary sigh.  "Come on thin,
Docthor," he murmured heavily, "wid me an' Yorke."

Making a wide detour they circled the ranch and wormed their way
cautiously through the dense scrub on its eastern side.  Suddenly, with a
warning gesture to his companions, the sergeant halted.  They had reached
the verge of the scrub and the front of the ranch-house faced
them--barely twenty yards distant.  They could discern a faint light
glimmering around the lower edge of one of the windows.

"He is in!" whispered Slavin exultantly.  "Blinds down though.  'Tis a
quare custom av his.  Come on thin, Yorkey, me bould second-in-command!
In a mighty few short minuts we shall know"--his jaw dropped--"fwhat we
shall know! . . .  Arrah thin, Docthor!"--he silenced a violent protest
from that adventurous gentleman, who made as though to accompany
them--"if ye wud help us in best fashion--shtay right here, an' mark
fwhat comes off.  If we shud happen tu get ut in th' neck . . . just yu'
beat ut back tu Lanky!  Ye know fwhat tu du--thin.  I'll lave me carbine
here awhile."

He stepped clear of the brush and, revolver in hand, advanced softly upon
the low, one-story, log-built dwelling.  Yorke followed a few steps in
his rear, with his carbine held in readiness at the "port-arms."

Reaching the door, the sergeant rapped upon it sharply.  There was no
response from within, but--the light vanished on the instant.  Yorke
stepped warily to the side and covered the door with his weapon.  A few
tense moments passed, and then Slavin rapped again.  Heavy footfalls now
sounded, approaching the door from the inside, halted, and then, through
the panels came Gully's hollow, booming bass: "Who's there?"

"Shlavin of th' Mounted Police, Gully.  Opin up! we wud shpake wid ye."

"What do you want?  What's your business at this hour of the night?"

"Fwhat do we want?"--the sergeant uttered mirthless chuckle--"fwhy 'tis
yu' we want, Gully--for murdher!  Come off th' perch, man, th' jig's up!
There's a bunch av us here--we've got yu're shack covered properly--wid
carbines--north, east, south, an' west--ye can pull nothin' off.  Come
now! will ye pitch up an' act reasonable?  'Tis no manner av use ye
shtartin' in tu buck th' Force.  Juty's juty--ye know that."

"Have you got a warrant, Sergeant?"

"Eyah!" came Slavin's sinister growl.  "We've bin fishin', Gully, up in
th' big pool beyant.  _Well_ ye must know that pool.  Fwhat we caught
there is our warrant.  Opin up now, will ye? else we bust yu're dhure in!"

"Slavin--Sergeant!  You and Yorke whom I've known all this time--good
fellows"--the deep, imploring tones faltered slightly--"do not push me to
it, man!  You and your men go away and leave me in peace this night.
Christ knows!  I don't want to do it but--if you persist in forcing an
entrance in here without a warrant--why!  I'll pull on your crowd till
there's not a man left."

"Gully!" the sergeant's voice shook with passion at the other's threat,
"ye bloody murdherin' dog!  Ye dhirty back-av-th'-head gun-artist!
Thryin' for tu come th' 'good-feller' over us av th' Mounted!  There's
on'y wan answer tu that, an' ye know ut.  Now, will ye opin up this
dhure, or I'll bust her down!"

And, as if to enforce his command, Slavin set his huge shoulder against
the door and gave a heave which caused the stout wood to crack ominously.

"Look out, Burke!" cried Yorke suddenly.  His right arm shot out and
jerked the maddened Irishman violently towards him.  His hasty action was
only just in time.

Bang! bang!  Two muffled shots detonated within, and white splinters flew
from a spot in the door covered a moment before by the sergeant's broad
breast.  With a startled oath Slavin flung up his gun, as if to fire
back; but Yorke clutched his arm and arrested the action.

"No, no, Burke!" he hissed warningly, "no use doing that!  You bet he's
not there now.  Lying 'doggo' behind the logs, most likely.  You'd only
blow a hole in the door that he could pick us off through after.  We're
proper marks in the moonlight here!  Let's back up, and keep the front
covered."

Slavin, balked of his prey, rumbled in his throat awhile, like some huge
bear; then, adopting Yorke's suggestion, he slowly backed up with the
latter to the sheltering brush, where they rejoined the expectant,
anxious doctor.

"Hit, either of you?" he enquired tersely.

Yorke replied in the negative.  "Mighty close shave for Burke here,
though" he added, "lucky I heard Gully cocking that blasted Luger of
his."  He uttered a suppressed chuckle, "Burke's always one to go
cautioning others, and then lose his temper and expose himself."

For some few minutes they canvassed the situation in tense whispers,
lying prone in the brush with their carbines covering their objective.

"Sh-sh!" hissed the doctor suddenly.  "Hark!"

With all their faculties on the stretch, they held their breaths and
listened intently.  In the stillness they heard the unmistakable noise as
of a window being cautiously lifted.  The sound came from the southern
end of the building.

Then they heard Redmond's voice ring out sharply from the bank: "No use,
Gully!  I've got you covered!  You can't make it from there!  You'd
better give in, man."

There was an instant's silence, then--crack! came the crisp report of the
Luger.  It was answered by the deep, reverberating bang! of a carbine,
and the crash of splintered glass and woodwork was followed by a boyish
laugh.

"Told you Reddy was there with the goods!" remarked Yorke, triumphantly,
to his superior, "don't suppose he got him though--Gully's too fly--he'd
duck into shelter the instant he'd fired.  I'll bet he's doing some tall
thinking just now.  Beggar's between the devil and the deep
sea--properly.  He'll chuck up the sponge just now, you'll see."

"Eyah!" agreed Slavin, with an oath, "he's up against it.  But Reddy down
there--I du not like th' idea av th' bhoy bein' all alone.  Yorkey, yu'
shlink thru' th' brush an' down th' bank an' kape um company awhile.  Th'
Docthor an' me'll kape th' front here covered."

A few minutes later, Yorke, after first challenging Redmond cautiously,
crept up beside his comrade below the sheltering river-bank.

"Did you get him?" he queried in a tense whisper.

"No, I don't think so," muttered Redmond disconsolately, "but--he d----d
near got me--look!"

He exhibited his Stetson hat.  A clean bullet perforation showed in the
pinched-up top.  "I could have got him--easy," he added, "when he first
opened the window.  Wish I had, now--but you know what Burke said--about
getting him alive--I only loosed off after he'd thrown down on me.  I was
scared for you and Burke, though!  I could see you both backing up--after
he'd shot through the door."

Bang!  A dull, muffled report detonated within the building.  The ominous
echoes gradually died away, and the stillness of the night settled over
all once more.

The crouching policemen stared at each other strangely.  "Hear that?"
ejaculated Redmond, with a startled oath, "By G----d! he's shot himself!
must have--it sounded muffled. . . .  All over!  I'll bet his brains--"

He broke off short and, shoving the barrel of his carbine over the edge
of the bank, he commenced to clamber up.  "Wait a second! . . .  Good
God, Red!  don't do that!" snarled Yorke warningly.  "He's as cunning as
a blasted _lobo_.  May be it's only a tr--"

The entreaty died in his throat.  Crack!  A spurt of flame shot from the
opened window, and Redmond, with a gasping exclamation of rage and pain,
toppled backwards onto the shingle, his carbine clattering down beside
him.  Fearful of relaxing his vigilance even at this crisis, the maddened
Yorke flung up his weapon and sent shot after shot crashing through the
open casement.  All could hear the smashing, rending sounds of havoc his
bullets were creating within.

"Doctor!" he shouted.  "Oh, Doctor!  Come on round quick!"  In a hoarse
aside he spat out feverishly, "Red!  Red! my old son! . . . hit bad?
Where'd you get it?"

"Shoulder!  Oh-h!" gasped poor Redmond, moaning and rolling on the
shingle in his agony, "Oh, Christ, it hurts!"

There came a crashing in the undergrowth on their right, and presently a
crouching form came creeping rapidly towards them under cover of the
sheltering bank.  In a terse aside Yorke acquainted the doctor with the
details of his comrade's mischance, keeping a wary eye meanwhile on the
window.  The ex-naval surgeon wasted no time in unnecessary question or
comment, but with the grim composure of an old campaigner swiftly
proceeded to render first aid to the wounded man.

"Right shoulder--low down!" he presently vouch-safed to the anxious
Yorke.  "Trust it's missed the lung! . . . can't tell yet! . . .  I must
get him away the best way I can.  No! . . . don't move, Yorke!  You keep
on your mark!  I can pack him I think.  I'll get him to the buckboard
somehow.  This is going to be a long siege, I'm thinking.  You'll be
getting reinforcements later.  Slavin told me to send for them."

Bang! crash!  The crisp sounds of splintering woodwork on the east side
of the shack denoted the fact of their quarry apparently attempting a
second escape from the front entrance.  Unaided, the doctor cleverly
executed the professional fire-fighter's trick of raising, balancing on
the back, and carrying an unconscious human body.  With an overwhelming
feeling of relief, not unmixed with admiration, at the other's gameness,
Yorke watched him stagger away in the gloom, bearing poor George upon his
bowed shoulders.

His momentary lack of vigilance proved well-nigh his own undoing, also.
Crack! spat the Luger again from the window.  His hat whirled from his
head, but he kept his presence of mind.  It was not the first time by
many that Yorke had been under fire.  Ducking down on the instant, he
moved swiftly three paces to his right, and then, finger on trigger, he
suddenly jerked upright and sent two more shots crashing through the
aperture.

"Mark-er!" he called out mockingly.  "Signal a miss, mark-er!  Ding-dong!
You'll get tired of it before we do, Gully!  You'd better give up the
ghost, man!"

His grim sarcasm failing to draw further fire from his desperate
opponent, the senior constable reloaded wearily and settled down to what
promised to be a long, danger-fraught vigil.




CHAPTER XIV

  He "went out," poor Gus, at the break o' day---
  Oh!--his kindly ways, and his cheery face!
  But . . . the Lord gave, and hath taken away,
  Hark! sounds "The Last Post," Requiescat in Pace!
                                        "THE LAST POST"


Slowly the night dragged through for the two grim, haggard sentinels.
Thrice during their vigil had their desperate quarry exercised his
marksmanship upon them with his deadly Luger.  Seemingly only by a
miracle did they escape each time.  The sergeant had his hat perforated
in similar fashion to his companions.  Yorke had a shoulder-strap torn
from his stable-jacket.  Adroitly shifting their positions each time he
fired, they greeted his shots with such withering blasts of carbine fire
that they finally silenced their enemy's battery.  Throughout he had
remained as mute as a trapped wolf.  Only an occasional cough indicated
that so far, apparently, he was unharmed and, like them, still grimly on
the alert.

Relief came to the two besiegers with the first streaks of dawn.  Dr.
Cox, with almost superhuman efforts, had somehow managed to reach Lanky
Jones and the buckboard with the wounded Redmond.  Swiftly conveying the
latter back to the detachment, the physician had immediately got in touch
with the night-operator at the station, and also MacDavid.

And now, guided by that old pioneer, Inspector Kilbride arrived upon the
scene with an armed party from the Post.  They had been rushed up by a
special train, which had been flagged by MacDavid at the nearest
objective point to Gully's ranch.

Swiftly and warily they skirmished towards their objective.  Half of the
party, under a sergeant, crept along below the sheltering river bank
where they soon joined the wearied, but still vigilant, Yorke.  The rest,
under the inspector, making a wide detour of the ranch, gained the brush
on its eastern side.  Among this last party were Hardy, McSporran and
McCullough.  In extended order they glided through the thick scrub and,
reaching its fringe, flung themselves prone with their carbines held in
readiness.

The inspector gradually wormed himself up beside Slavin who, in a few
tense whispers, acquainted his superior with all details of the
situation.  Full well, both men realized what a perilous spot it was, for
all concerned, on the eastern front of the shack.  Straining their eyes
in the gray, ghostly gloom they could just discern an open casement.
Apparently it was from this well-sheltered embrasure that Gully had
previously attempted to pick off Slavin.  With the coming of daylight
their position would be absolutely untenable in the face of further fire
from the enemy.  On the other hand, if they retreated further into the
scrub they would lose sight of their objective altogether.

So much Kilbride intimated to the sergeant as they held whispered
consultation.  Also, he imparted reassuring news anent Redmond.  The
latter's injury, though serious, was not a mortal hurt, according to a
report from MacDavid, who had left the doctor watching his patient
closely at the detachment.

Suddenly, a few paces to the right of where they lay, came the sound of
one of the party stealthily clearing his throat.  Poor fellow! his
momentary lack of caution proved to be his death warrant.

Crack!  A spurt of flame leapt from the velvety-black square of casement.
The horrid, unforgetable cry of a man wounded unto death echoed the shot,
and the startled besiegers could hear their comrade threshing around
amongst the dead leaves in his agony.

"Steady, men! steady now! don't expose yourselves!" yelled the inspector.
"Fire at that window, while I get to this man!--keep me covered!"

His commands were eagerly obeyed.  Sheltered by the roaring burst of
carbine fire he wriggled sideways in feverish haste and eventually gained
the stricken man.  The latter's convulsive threshing of limbs had ceased
and an instant's examination convinced the inspector that Gully's random
shot had been fatal.

For awhile the besiegers poured in brisk volleys upon the door and
windows, until the inspector gave the command to "Cease Fire!"
Suddenly--mockingly--hard upon the last shot, the echoes of which had
barely died away, came again the vicious, whip-like crack of the Luger;
this time from the southern end of the shack.  The long-drawn,
nerve-shattering scream of the first casualty was duplicated, and a
carbine volley crashed from the river bank.

Then up from the attacking party swelled an exceeding bitter, angry cry;
the grim, deadly exasperation of men goaded to the point of recklessly
attempting ruthless reprisal upon their hidden enemy.  With a total
disregard of personal safety many of them sprang up out of cover, as if
to charge upon their hated objective.

"As you were!  Back, men! back!" rang out the deep, imperious voice of
Kilbride.  The stern command checked the onrush of maddened men.  "D'you
hear me?" he thundered, "Take cover again immediately--everyone. . . .
I'll give the word when to rush him, and that's not yet."

It said much for the discipline of the Force that his commands were
obeyed, albeit in somewhat mutinous fashion.  The inspector turned to
Slavin with fell eyes.  "Christ!" he said, "there's two men gone!  I
won't chance any more lives in this fashion!  I'll give him ten minutes
to surrender and if he don't give up the ghost then . . . .  I'll do what
an emergency like this calls for--what I came prepared to do, if
necessary.  Sergeant! take charge of this side until further orders; I'm
going down the bank to the other party awhile."

He stole away through the brush and presently they all heard his
stentorian tones ring out from the river bank.  "Gully! oh, Gully!  It's
Inspector Kilbride speaking.  I'll give you ten minutes to come out and
give yourself up.  If you don't--well! . . .  I've got a charge of
dynamite here . . . and a fuse, and I'll blow you and your shack to hell,
my man.  It's up to you--now!"

There was no response to the inspector's ultimatum.  Amidst dead silence
the prescribed time slowly passed.  Fifteen minutes--then, a gasping
murmur of excitement arose from those on the eastern front, as in the
rapidly whitening dawn they saw Kilbride suddenly reappear around the
northern and blank end of the building.  For some few moments they
watched his actions in awe-struck, breathless silence as, with bent back,
he busied himself with his dangerous task.

Presently he straightened up.  "Now!  Look out, everybody!" he bawled.
He struck a match and applied it to something that immediately began to
splutter, and then he retreated a safe distance northward.  All eyes were
glued, as if fascinated, to the deadly, sputtering fuse.  Soon came the
dull, muffled roar of an explosion.  The walls of the building sagged
outwards, the roof caved in, and the whole structure seemed to collapse
like a pack of cards, amid a cloud of dust.

For some few seconds the party gazed fearfully at the work of
destruction; then a loud cheer went up, and with one accord all dashed
forward, filled with eager, morbid curiosity as to what they might find
buried beneath the ruins.

Suddenly, midway between the brush and their objective they checked their
onrush and halted, staring in speechless amazement.  Pushing his way up,
apparently from some hole beneath a pile of debris, appeared the figure
of a huge man.

In their excitement the attackers had overlooked the possibility of a
cellar existing below the stone foundation of the dwelling.  At this
juncture the party from the river bank was rapidly approaching the ruins
from its western side.  The posse was in a dilemma.  Neither party dare
fire at its quarry between them for fear of hitting each other.

Gully apparently either did not realize the situation or did not care.
With face convulsed with passion, beyond all semblance to a human being,
he crouched and rushed the party on the eastern side of his wrecked home,
firing as he came.  Badly hit, several of his assailants were speedily
_hor de combat_, among them, Hardy and McCullough.  The whole incident
happened in quicker time than it takes to relate.

Then, from out the startled crowd there sprang a man.  It was Slavin.
His hour had come.  There was something appalling in the spectacle of the
two gigantic men rushing thus upon each other.  Suddenly, Gully tripped
over a log and fell headlong, his deadly gun flying from his grasp.  With
a sort of uncanny, cat-like agility he scrambled to his feet and strove
to recover his weapon.  He was a fraction of a second too late.  A kick
from Slavin sent it whirling several yards away, and the next moment the
opponents were upon each other.

At the first onslaught the issue of the combat seemed doubtful.  The
ex-sheriff was no wrestler like Slavin, but he speedily demonstrated that
he was a boxer, as well as a gun-man.  Cleverly eluding the grasp of his
powerful assailant for the moment, twice he rocked Slavin's head back
with fearful left and right swings to the jaw.  With a bestial rumbling
in his throat, the sergeant countered with a pile-driving punch to the
other's heart; then, ducking his head to avoid further punishment, he
grappled with the murderer.  Roaring inarticulately in their Berserker
rage, the pair bore a closer resemblance to a bear and a gorilla than men.

Once in that terrible grip, however, Gully, big and powerful man though
he was, had not the slightest chance with a wrestler of Slavin's ability.
Shifting rapidly from one cruel hold to another the huge Irishman
presently whirled his antagonist up over his hip and sent him crashing to
the ground, face downwards.  Then, kneeling upon the neck of his
struggling and blaspheming victim, he held him down until handcuffs
finally imprisoned the enormous wrists, and leg-irons the ankles.

The grim, long-protracted duel was over at last.  But at lamentable cost.
Two men killed outright, and five badly wounded had been the deadly toll
exacted by Gully in his last, desperate stand.

The rays of the early morning shone upon a strange and solemn scene.
Gully, guarded by two constables, was seated upon the stone foundation
that marked the site of his wrecked dwelling.  Head in hands, sunk in a
sort of stupor, his attitude portrayed that of a man from whom all
earthly hope had fled.  Some distance away lay the wounded men, being
roughly, but sympathetically attended to by their comrades.  All were
awaiting now the arrival of the coroner, and also the means of
transportation which the inspector had ordered MacDavid to requisition
for them.

Presently came those who reverently bore the dead upon
hastily-constructed stretchers.  Silently Inspector Kilbride indicated a
spot near the fringe of brush; and there, side by side, they laid them
down, covering the bodies with a blanket dragged from the debris of the
shattered dwelling.

Bare-headed, the rest of the party gathered around their officer.  Long
and sadly Kilbride gazed down upon the still forms outlined under their
covering.  Twice he essayed to speak, but each time his voice failed him.

"Men!" he said at last huskily, as if to himself.  "Men! is this what I
have brought you into? . . .  Is this--"

He choked, and was silent awhile; then; "Oh!" cried he suddenly, "God
knows! . . . under the circumstances I used the best judgment I--"

But Slavin broke in and laid a tremulous hand on his superior's shoulder.
"No! no!  Sorr! . . . hush! for th' love av Christ! . . .  Ye must not--"
the soft Hibernian brogue sank to a gentle hush--"niver fear . . . for
thim that's died doin' their juty! . . .  'Tis th' Peace, Sorr--th' Peace
everlastin' . . . for Hornsby an' Wade.  They were good men. . . ."

Yorke bent down and, drawing back a fold of the blanket, exposed two
still white faces.  In the centre of Hornsby's forehead all beheld
Gully's terrible sign-manual.  Wade had been shot through the throat.

"Hornsby!" gasped Yorke brokenly, "poor old Gus Hornsby!" . . .  He
turned a tired, drawn face up to Slavin's.  "He was with us in the Yukon,
Burke.  Remember how we used to rag him when he first came to us as a
cheechaco buck?  But the poor beggar never used to get sore over it . . .
always seemed sort of . . . patient . . . and happy . . . no matter how
we joshed him. . . ."

Gently he replaced the blanket, stared stupidly a moment at the grim,
haggard face of his sergeant, then he burst out crying and wandered away
from the sad scene.




CHAPTER XV

  That very night, while gentle sleep
    The people's eyelids kiss'd,
  Two stern-faced men set out from Lynn,
    Through the cold and heavy mist;
  And Eugene Aram walk'd between,
    With gyves upon his wrist.
                           "THE DREAM OF EUGENE ARAM"


Slowly the memorable June day had drawn to a close, and now darkness had
set in and the moon shone brightly down upon the old detachment of
Davidsburg.  It had been a strenuous day for Inspector Kilbride and his
subordinates, as many details of the eventful case had to be arranged ere
they could leave with their prisoner on the night's train for the Post.

The inspector's first care, naturally, had been the slow and careful
conveyance of the wounded men (Redmond included)--and the dead--down to
the special train which still awaited them on the Davidsburg siding.  The
bulk of the party departed with them, the officer retaining Slavin,
Yorke, and McSporran.  A coroner's inquest, held that afternoon upon the
remains of the unfortunate hobo, Drinkwater, had resulted in a verdict of
"wilful murder" being returned against Ruthven Gully.  Two days later, at
the Post, similar verdicts were rendered in the cases of poor Hornsby and
Wade.

Throughout the day Gully had remained in a sort of sullen, brooding
stupor.  But now, with the coming of night, he seemed to grow
restless--pacing within the narrow confines of his cell like unto a
trapped wolf, his leg-shackles clanking at every turn.  Seated outside
the barred door, McSporran maintained a close and vigilant guard.  It
wanted four hours yet until train time and inside the living-room the
inspector, Slavin, and Yorke were beguiling the interval in low-voiced
conversation.

"Strange thing, Sergeant," remarked Kilbride musingly, "I can't place him
now, but I'll swear I've seen this man, Gully, before; somewhere back of
beyond, I guess.  I've been in some queer holes and corners on this globe
in my time--long before I ever took on the Force.  Seems he has, too,
from what you and Yorke have told me.  D----d strange! . . .  I've got a
fairly good memory for faces but--"

He broke off and looked enquiringly at McSporran, who had silently
entered just then.  "What is it, McSporran?"

"Gully, Sirr!" responded the constable, saluting.  "He wad wish tu speak
wi' ye, Sirr."

The inspector's face hardened, and his steely eyes glittered strangely as
he heard the news.  For a brief space he remained, chin in hand, in deep
thought; then rising, he sauntered slowly over to the prisoner's cell.

"What is it you want, Gully?" he said quietly.

"Kilbride--Inspector!" came the great rumbling bass through the bars.
"If you keep me cooped up in this pen much longer . . .  I tell
you! . . . you'll have me slinging loose in the head--altogether!"  He
uttered a mirthless, wolf-like bark of a laugh.  "My ears are keener than
your memory--I heard you speaking just now.  Listen!--" a curiously
wistful note crept into his deep tones, for the inspector had made an
angry, impatient gesture--"Listen, Kilbride! . . .  I'm gone up--I know
it--therefore, if I sing my 'swan song' now or later, it can matter
little one way or the other; and I would rather sing it to you and Slavin
and Yorke there than to anyone else.  Before I am through, you all
may--shall we say--p'raps judge me a trifle less harshly than you do now.
Regard this as . . . practically the last request of a man who is as good
as dying . . . that--I be allowed to sit amongst you once more . . . and
talk, and talk, and ta--"

His voice broke, and he left the sentence unfinished.  For some few
seconds the inspector remained motionless, with bent head, just
looking--and looking--in deep, reflective silence at the doomed man who
importuned him.

"Am I to understand that you wish to make a statement, Gully?" he said,
in even, passionless tones.  "Remember!--you've been charged and warned,
man--whatever you say'll be used in evidence against you at your trial."

The other, hesitating a moment, swallowed nervously in his agitation.

"Yes," he said huskily, "I know--but that's all right! . . .  As I said
before--it can make little or no difference . . . in my case. . . ."

Turning, Kilbride silently motioned to McSporran to unlock the cell-door.

The huge manacled prisoner emerged, and shuffled awkwardly towards the
inner room, closely attended by his armed escort.

Slavin and Yorke, seated together at one end of the table, arose as Gully
entered.  Standing curiously still, as if carved in stone, their bitter
eyes alone betraying their emotions, silently they gazed at the huge,
gaunt, unkempt figure that came shambling towards them.

Gully halted and stared long and fixedly at the relentless faces of the
two men whose grim, dogged vigilance had led to his undoing.  Over his
blood-streaked, haggard face there swept the peculiar ruthless smile
which they knew so well; and he raised his manacled hands in a semblance
of a salute.

"_Morituri te salufant_!" he muttered in his harsh, growling bass--the
speech nevertheless of an educated man.

"Eh, fwhat?" queried Slavin vaguely.  The classical allusion was lost on
him, but Kilbride and Yorke exchanged a grim, meaning smile as they
recalled the ancient formula of the Roman arena.  McSporran pushed
forward a chair, into which Gully dropped heavily.  Chin cupped in hands,
and elbows resting on knees he remained for a space in an attitude of
profound thought.  The inspector, resuming his chair at the table,
motioned his subordinates to be seated, and reached forward for some
writing materials.

"All right, now, Gully!" he began, in a hard, metallic tone.  "What is it
you wish to say?"  All waited expectantly.

Apparently with an effort Gully roused himself out of the deep reverie
into which be had sunk, and for a space he gazed with blood-shot eyes
into the calm, stern face of his questioner.  Then, with a sort of dreamy
sighing ejaculation, he roused himself and, leaning back in his chair,
began the following remarkable story.  He spoke in a recklessly earnest
manner and with a sort of deadly composure that startled and impressed
his hearers in no little degree.

"Listen, Inspector," he said.  "A good deal of the story I'm going to
tell you has no bearing on the--the--the--case in hand.  There's no use
in you taking all this down.  I understand procedure"--he smiled
wanly--"therefore, with your permission I'll go ahead, and you can
construct a brief statement on your own lines afterwards, which I will
sign."

Kilbride bowed his head in assent to the other's request.

"The name I bear now," began the prisoner,--"'Ruthven Gully'--is my real
name, though knocking around the world like I've been since I was a kid
of sixteen, and the many queer propositions I've been up against in my
time, why--I've found it expedient to use various aliases.

"For instance"--he eyed the inspector keenly--"I wasn't known as 'Gully'
that time Cronje nailed us all at Doornkop, Kilbride, in
'ninety-six. . . ."

Kilbride uttered a startled oath.  Shaken out of his habitual stern
composure he stared at the man before him in sheer amazement.  "Good
God!" he cried, "The 'Jameson Raid!' . . .  Now I know you,
man!--you're--you're--wait a bit!  I've got it on the tip of my
tongue--Mor--Mor--Mordaunt, by gad! . . . that's what you called yourself
then.  Ever since I sat with you on that case I've been turning it over
in my head where in ever I'd fore-gathered with you before.  It was your
moustache which fooled me--you were clean-shaven then. . .  Well,
Well! . . ."

He was silent awhile, overcome by the discovery.  "Aye!" he resumed in an
altered voice, "I've got good cause to remember you, Mor--Gully, I mean.
You certainly saved my life that day . . . when we were lying in that
_donga_ together.  I was hit pretty bad, and you stood 'em off.  You were
a wonderful shot, I recollect.  I saw you flop out six Doppers--one after
the other."

He turned to Slavin.  "Sergeant!" he said quietly, "You'd better leave
the leg-irons on, but remove his handcuffs--for the time-being,
anyway. . . ."  He addressed himself to the prisoner with a sort of sad
sternness.  "It's little I can do for you now, Gully . . . but I can do
that, at least. . . ."

Slavin complied with his officer's request.  Gully's huge chest heaved
once, and he bowed his head in silent acknowledgment of Kilbride's act of
leniency.

"All right! go ahead, Gully!" said the latter.

The prisoner took up his tale anew.  "As I was saying--I left the Old
Country when I was sixteen.  No need to drag in family troubles,
but . . . that's why. . . .  Well!  I hit for the States.  Montana for a
start off, and it sure was a tough state in 'seventy-four, I can tell
you.  That's where I first learned to handle a gun.  I knocked around
between there and Wyoming and Arizona for about nine years, and during
that time I guess I tackled nearly every kind of job under the sun, but I
punched and rode for range outfits mostly.

"Then I was struck with a fancy to see the South, and I drifted to
Virginia.  I'd been there about two years, working as an overseer on a
tobacco plantation, when I got a letter from our family's solicitor
recalling me home.  My eldest brother had died, and the estate had passed
on to me.  Where, Inspector?--why, it was at Castle Brompton, a quiet
little country town in Worcestershire.

"Well!  I'd had a pretty rough training--living the life of a roustabout
for so many years, and I guess I kind of ran amuck when I struck home.  I
played ducks and drakes with the estate, and the end of it was . . . I
got heavily involved in debt.  There seemed nothing for it but to
up-anchor, and to sea again in my shirt.  So, my fancy next took me to
Shanghai, where I obtained a poorly-paid Civil Service job--in the
Customs.  I stuck that for about a year, and then I pulled
out--disgusted.  The next place I landed up in was, if anything,
worse--the Gold Coast.  From there I drifted to the Belgian Congo.  I was
there for nearly two years doing--well! perhaps it's best for me not to
enter into details--we'll call it 'rubber.'  It's a cruel country
that--one that a man doesn't exactly stay in for his health, anyway; for
a bad dose of fever nearly fixed me.  It made me fed up with the climate
and--the life.  So I pulled out of it and went down country to the
Transvaal.  That's how I came to get mixed up in 'The Raid,' Inspector.
I was in Jo'burg at the time it was framed up, so I threw in my lot with
the rest of you.

"Suddenly I had an overwhelming desire to go back to the States and the
range life again.  I was properly fed up with Africa.  So--back I went
there--to Montana again.  I punched for one or two cow-outfits awhile,
and then came a time when a deputation of citizens came and put it up to
me if I'd take on the office of Deputy-Sheriff for ---- County, where I
happened to be working.  I suppose the fact of my being a little more
handy with a gun than most had impressed some of them.  Things were
running wild there just then, and for awhile I tell you, I was up against
a rather dirty proposition.  I and my guns certainly worked overtime for
a stretch, till I got matters more or less ship-shape.  I had the backing
of the best people in the community luckily, and eventually I won out.

"Then--when the inevitable reaction set in with the peaceable times that
followed, somehow I managed to get in bad with some of them.  They had no
more use for me or my guns.  I was like a fish out of water.  I decided
to pull out, for a strange hankering to see England and my old home again
came over me.  So I resigned my office and headed back to the Old
Country. . . ."

At this point in his narrative, Gully dropped his head in his hands and
rocked wearily awhile ere continuing haltingly: "It was the mistake of my
life--ever going back--to a civilized country.  For a time I strove to
conduct myself as a law-abiding British citizen--to conform to the new
order of things, but--I had been amongst the rough stuff too long.  I was
out of my sphere entirely.

"One day, in a hotel at Leeds, I got into a violent quarrel with a
man--fellow of the name of Hammond.  It was over a woman.  He insulted
me--in front of a crowd of men at that--and finally he struck me.
Hitherto I'd taken no back-down from any man living, and I guess I forgot
myself then and kind of ran amuck--fancied I was back in Montana again.
Consequence was--I threw down on him in front of this crowd and shot him
dead.

"Of course I was arrested and charged with murder in the first degree;
but as it was adduced at my trial that I'd received a certain amount of
provocation, I was sent down for fifteen years.  I'd done little over six
months of my time in Barmsworth Prison when I and two of my fellow
convicts framed up a scheme to escape.  It takes too long to go into
details how we worked it.  I made my get-away, though I had to abolish a
poor devil of a warder in doing so.  The other two lost out.  One got
shot and the other was caught some days later--as I read in the papers.

"Well!  I managed to reach the States again, and eventually came over
this side of the line.  As I had been convicted and sentenced under the
alias which I had adopted while in England--my real name never coming
out--I resumed my name of Gully again when I settled down here.  My
relatives, what few I possess, have never known of my conviction and
imprisonment.  All the time I was in England on my second trip I was
clean-shaven, but on returning to the States I let my moustache grow once
more.  As you said, Kilbride--it is a very effectual disguise.  Will one
of you give me a drink, please?  My mouth's pretty dry with all this
talking."

Yorke got up and brought him a glass of water, and he drank it down with
a murmur of thanks.

"Now!" he said, continuing his narrative: "I'm coming to the worst part
of all.  You'll all wonder I've not gone mad--brooding; but I've got to
go through with it.  When I settled down here I honestly did struggle
hard to live down my past and start afresh with a clean sheet.  I
borrowed some money from an old ex-sheriff friend of mine in
Montana--which loan, by the way, I have paid all back--every cent--and
bought"--he gazed gloomily at Kilbride--"what was my home.  But
somehow . . . Fate seems to have dogged me and tripped me up in the end.
Until last January everything was going well with me.  As Slavin and
Yorke here can testify . . . I was conducting myself fairly and squarely
with all men.

"Then--one day Yorke brought that Blake and Moran case up in front of me.
Both of these men I'd met before, but they didn't recognize me again--not
absolutely.  I usually contrived to keep pretty clear of them for reasons
which will appear obvious later.  I'm coming to that.  Moran I recognised
as a former Montana tough who used to hang around Havre--bronco-buster,
cow-puncher, and tin-horn by turns.  Many a time I've caught him sizing
me up, in Cow Run and elsewhere--mighty hard, too, but he never seemed to
be sure of me.  Once he did chance a feeler, but I just twirled my
moustache, à la Lord Tomnoddy, and bluffed him to a finish.

"Larry Blake"--a ruthless gleam flickered momentarily in Gully's
deep-set, shadowy eyes--"Larry Blake, I recognized as the son of the
Governor of Barmsworth Prison--old Gavin Blake.  Sometimes this young
fellow used to come around with his father, when the old gentleman was
making his daily tour of inspection.  I well remember the first time I
saw him--young Larry.  I was chipping stone in the quarry, amongst a
gang, with a ball and chain on.  I'd been in about two months then.  The
Governor was showing some visitors around, and his son was with him.
They were staring at us like people do at wild animals in a show.  I was
pointed out to them, and my recent crime mentioned.  I remember young
Blake eying me with especial interest.  He came out to Canada and hit
these parts about two years after I'd located here.

"Well! now and again when we'd run across each other I'd find him looking
at me in a queer, vague fashion, too; but I felt safe enough with him;
like I did with Moran--until this case came up.  After it was over, he
and I happened to be alone, and, in a round-about way, he began asking me
questions.  He did it so clumsily, though, that my suspicions were
aroused at once.  Of course I bluffed him--or thought I had--easily for
the moment, but one day I happened to be in the Post Office getting my
mail when, amongst a bunch of letters on the counter I saw one addressed
to 'Gavin Blake, Esq., Governor of Barmsworth Prison, England.'  Old
Kelly, the postmaster, having his back to me at the time, fumbling around
the pigeon-holes, I promptly annexed this letter and slipped it into my
pocket.

"When I opened it up my suspicions were verified.  Young Blake wrote to
his father that he'd come across a man whom he could almost swear to as
being one of the three convicts who'd broken out of Barmsworth some years
back.  He asked what steps he'd better take in the case--if the original
warrant issued for me could be forwarded to the Mounted Police, and so
on.  He said his intentions were to try and gain further evidence, and in
the meantime to confide in no one about his suspicions until he received
definite instructions what steps to take.

"I guess the devil must have got a good grip on me again after I'd read
that letter.  It seemed no use trying to redeem the past with outsiders
like young Blake making it their business to butt in and lay one by the
heels.  Anyway, like Satan at prayers, I didn't feel like being coolly
sacrificed when my years of honest effort were drawing near their reward
in the shape of a fairly prosperous ranch--just at the whim of a lazy,
profligate young busy-body.

"From that hour Larry Blake was practically--'gone up.'  I'd deliberately
made up my mind to put him out of business on the first convenient
opportunity that presented itself.  That opportunity came on the night he
was fighting with Moran in the hotel.  I thought I could kill two birds
with one stone.  I'll admit it was a devilish idea, but I was desperate.
Of course things didn't shape out as I'd planned--Moran's alibi for
instance, or that hobo, Drinkwater.

"I know to you it will only appear sheer nonsense on my part ever to
start in attempting to justify my--my abolishment of him.  But this--what
I am going to tell you--is the absolute truth of what happened.  In the
first place--when he spotted me bringing Moran's horse into the stable
that night--although I was mad and man-handled the poor devil at the
time--I felt fairly easy in my mind later, thinking he would drift out of
town next day, after the manner of his kind.  But when he was brought up
in front of me afterwards, I realized the serious predicament I was in."

He turned to Slavin.  "Sergeant!" he went on: "I'll admit I was feeling
pretty queer when you were examining that man--especially about the
smelling of drink business.  I'd slipped him a snort of whiskey after
you'd gone down to Doctor Cox's to get those papers signed.  I told him
to keep his mouth shut if he was questioned about any horse or man--and
that I'd get him off if he obeyed my instructions.  Of course he didn't
know what all this was for.  He had no opportunity of knowing--never did
know, though I fancy he thought it was a case of horse-stealing.  Anyway,
my promises and the drink made him my ally at once.  Only human nature
for him to side with me against the Police.  As you know, Sergeant, you
can get more definite results from that class of man by a drink bribe
than by all the threats and promises in the world.

"My original intention in taking him out to my place was to slip him
twenty dollars or so, and head him adrift westward, and so out of things.
But after we got home and I put the proposition up to him, the beggar
began to assert himself and get bold and saucy--tried to blackmail me for
an unheard of amount--threatening he'd go and tell you everything if I
didn't come across, and all that.  Finally I lost my temper with him and
gave him a good slap across the face.  He happened to be outside the
house bucking wood at the time, and, when I hit him, he came for me with
the axe.  I only jumped back just in time, as he struck.  I threw down on
him and put him out of business right-away then, realizing I was up
against it."

Gully halted for a space and leaned his head in his hands.  "God!" he
muttered presently, "what nights I've had!  I've killed many men in my
time, but those two--I hated framing up all that business on you fellows
next day--those tracks and the bill-folder, and all that useless chasing
for a week, but it seemed to me to be the only plausible bluff I could
run on you, under the circumstances.  Now, are there any more things you
don't understand?  Any questions you'd like to ask me?"

"Yes!" queried Slavin.  "How did you get to Calgary that night--after
you'd missed the nine-thirty eastbound.  Jump a freight, or what?  You
were seen to get on the train. . . ."

"I know that," said Gully slowly, "I did it for a blind.  I walked
through the coaches and slipped out again at the far end of the
platform--in the dark.  No! I didn't jump a freight, Sergeant.  I was
tempted to; but on second thoughts the idea made me feel kind of uneasy.
Perhaps you'll be dubious of this, but, as a fact, I took a
'tie-pass'--walked it all the way to Calgary on the track.  I was about
done when I made Shagnappi Point, beating my passage through all that
snow.  I bought a new pair of cow-puncher's boots while I was in town.
You remember I was wearing them when I returned.  I had the overshoes
wrapped up as a parcel and packed them back to the ranch and burnt
them--and Drinkwater's boots."

"How about that Savage automatic?" said Yorke, "the one you shot those
dogs with yesterday?  We've got your Luger, but where's the Savage gun?"

"Oh, yes!" replied Gully wearily, "of course I had two guns.  I never
used to pack the Luger around--afterwards, well! . . . for obvious
reasons.  You'll probably find the Savage in the cellar at my
place--that's if it isn't buried, like I nearly was."

There was a long silence, broken only by the scratch, scratch, of the
inspector's pen, as he rapidly indited a formal statement for the
prisoner to sign.  Once during its composition he halted for a brief
space and, leaning back in his chair, gazed long with a sort of dreary
sternness at the huge, unkempt figure before him.

"Gully," he said slowly, "whatever in God's name put it into your head to
stand off the Police in the way you did?  Shooting those two poor chaps
and nearly putting the kibosh on five others!  Whatever did you hope to
gain by it?  You must have known it was absolutely impossible for you to
make your get-away from us.  Why, man! we had you cornered like a wolf in
a trap.  It was worse than silly and useless and cruel for you to act in
the way you did!"

"Oh, my God!  I don't know!" moaned Gully, rocking despondently with his
head in his hands.  "I must have gone clean mad for the time
being. . . ."  He gazed gloomily at Slavin and Yorke, muttering half to
himself: "What little things do trip a man up in the end!  The best laid
schemes o' mice and men!  But for my shooting those cursed dogs yesterday
you'd never, never have suspected me.  The whole thing would just have
been filed and forgotten in time--would just have remained one of those
unfathomable mysteries.  Directly after I'd thrown down on those curs I
realized what a d----d bad break I'd made--what my momentary loss of
temper was going to cost me.  I could tell by the way you all looked at
me what was in your minds. . . ."

"Yes, but how about that fishing expedition of ours, Gully?" said Yorke.
"You seem to have forgotten that."  And he related the story of Redmond's
dive.

"Ah!" retorted Gully, bitterly.  "And yet you might have got snagged a
hundred times there and only just cursed and snapped your line and reeled
in, thinking it was a log or something. . . .  Well, as I was saying, I
realized the jig was up after that dog business, and directly I got home
I began making preparations for my get-away last night.  If you'd all
only have come half an hour later than you did--That's what made me so
mad--just another half hour later, mind you, and I would have been
away--en route for the Coast by the night train."

Presently Kilbride threw aside his pen and straightened up.  "Now,
listen, Gully!" he said.  And he read out the confession that he had
composed from the main facts of the prisoner's remarkable statement.

"Yes!" muttered Gully thoughtfully, as the inspector finished.  "Yes,
that will do, Kilbride.  Give me the pen, please, and I will sign
it. . . ."

He proceeded to affix his signature, continuing with a sort of deadly
composure: "I have endorsed and executed many death-warrants in my
time--in my capacity of Deputy-Sheriff--I little thought that some day I
might be called upon to sign my own . . . which this document virtually
is. . . ."

He reared himself up to his huge, gaunt height, and with a sweeping
glance at his captors added: "Nothing remains for me now I imagine, but
to shake hands with--Radcliffe.[1] . . ."

And his dreadful voice died away like a single grim note of a great,
deep-toned bell, tolled perchance in some prison-yard.


"_Eshcorrt_!  Get ready!" boomed out Sergeant Slavin's harsh command.
The party was on the station platform.  Yorke and McSporran fell in
briskly on either side of their heavily-manacled prisoner, and stood
watching the distant lights of the oncoming east-bound train as it
rounded the Davidsburg bend.

One last despairing glance Gully cast about him at the all familiar
surroundings, then he raised his fettered hands on high and lifted up his
great voice:

"I have striven!  I have striven!--and now!--Oh! there is no God!  Bear
witness there is no God!  No God! . . ." he cried to the heavens.

The wild, harsh, dreadful blasphemy rang far and wide out into the night,
floating over the nearby river and finally dying away a ghastly murmur up
among the timber-lined spurs of Crag Cañon.

And a huge, gaunt lobo wolf, lying at the crest of the draw, flung up his
gray head and howled back his awful note--seemingly in echo:  "There is
no God! no God!"


[1] Note by Author--Canada's official executioner at this period.




CHAPTER XVI

  "Feel my pulse, sir, if you want to,
          but it ain't much use to try--"
  "Never say that," said the Surgeon,
          as he smothered down a sigh:
  "Chuck a brace, for it won't do, man,
          for a soldier to say die!"
  "What you say don't make no diffrunce, Doctor,
          an'--you wouldn't lie. . . ."
                                        "THE OLD SERGEANT"


"Git there!  Come a-Haw-r-r, then!  Whoa!" With a flourish, Constable
Miles Sloan, the Regimental Teamster, swung the leaders of his splendid
four-in-hand and pulled up at the front entrance of the Holy Cross
Hospital.  Slewing around on his high box-seat he addressed himself to
the drag's occupants, Slavin and Yorke.

"I don't know whether they will let you see him, or not," he remarked
doubtfully, "he's a pretty sick man."

"We will chance ut, anyway," mumbled Slavin, as he and Yorke climbed out
of the rig.  "Ye'd best wait awhile, Miles!  We shan't be long."

Quietly--very quietly, Sister Marthe opened the door of room Number
Fifty-six, and with list-slippered noiselessness stepped out into the
corridor.

"Oh, Mon Dieu!" she ejaculated, startled at the sudden apparition of two
scarlet-coated figures standing motionless outside the door, "Oh,
m'sieurs, 'ow you fright me!" and the expressive eyes under the white
coif and the shoulders and supple hands of the French-Canadian
Nursing-Sister made great play.

Yorke saluted her with grave courtesy.  "Sister," he said anxiously, "how
is Constable Redmond doing?  Can we see him?"

She glanced irresolutely a moment at the handsome, imploring countenance
of the speaker, and then her gaze flickered to his huge companion.  The
silent, wistful appeal she read in the latter's grim, cadaverous face
decided her.

"_Eheu_!" she said softly, "'e is a ver' seeck man . . . but come then,
m'sieurs, if you wish it!"

Cautiously they tip-toed into the room behind her.

Yes!  They decided, he was a "seeck" man all right!  So sick that he
could not raise his flushed, hollow-cheeked young face from the pillow to
salute his comrades with his customary impious bonhomie.  Now, gabbling
away to himself in the throes of delirium, ever his feverish eyes stared
beyond the hospital-walls westwards to Davidsburg.

With his brow contracted with an expression of vague worry, he was living
over and over again the memorable night in which he had gotten his wound.

"Slavin!--Yorkey!" he kept repeating, in tones of such yearning entreaty
that moved those individuals more than they cared to show.  Yes, they
were both of them there, standing by the side of his cot; but the poor
sufferer's unseeing eyes betrayed no recognition.

The deep sorrow that oppressed Slavin and Yorke just then those worthies
rarely--if ever--alluded to afterwards.  Passing the love of women is the
unspoken, indefinable spirit of true comradeship that exists between some
men.

For one brief, soul-baring moment the comrades stared at each other,
their self-conscious faces reflecting mutually their inmost feelings;
then Yorke turned to Sister Marthe.

"What does the Doctor say?" he whispered anxiously.

The nurse was about to make answer when the door was softly opened and
that gentleman entered the room, accompanied by Captain Bargrave and
Inspector Kilbride.

Involuntarily, from long habit of discipline, Slavin and Yorke, stiffened
to "attention" in the presence of their superiors, until, with a kindly,
yet withal slightly  imperious  gesture, the  O.C. mutely signified them
to relax their formal attitude.  The Regimental Surgeon, Dr. Sampson, a
tall, gray-moustached, pleasant-faced man, nodded to them familiarly and
proceeded to make minute examination of his patient's wound.  From time
to time he questioned and issued low-voiced instructions to Sister
Marthe.  Perfectly motionless, the grave-eyed quartette of policemen
stood grouped around the cot, silently awaiting the physician's verdict.

Throughout, poor Redmond had continued to toss and rave incessantly.
Much of his babbling was incoherent and fragmentary--breaking off short
in the middle of a sentence or dying away in a mumbling, indistinct
murmur.  At intervals though, his voice rang out with startling clearness.

"Ah-a-a!  Here he is!" he cried out suddenly, "Gully!"--all eyes were
centred on the flushed, unquiet face and restless hands.  There seemed a
curious, morbid fascination in watching the workings of that
sub-conscious mind.  "No use, Gully!  You can't make it from there!"--the
twitching hands made a motion as of levelling a carbine--"No use, man!
I've got you covered. . . .  You' better give in! . . ."

He paused for a space, panting feverishly, then his eyes became wilder
and his speech more rapid.

"No! no! Gully!" he gasped out imploringly, "it's Yorkey, I tell you--oh,
don't pick off Yorkey! . . .  Drink? . . ."--the unnaturally bright eyes
stared unseeingly at the motionless figure of the O.C., standing at the
foot of the cot--"Not so much--now--since--looking after him. . . .  Not
a bad chap. . . .  We fought once. . . .  Yes, Sir! . . . had--hell of a
fight! . . .  Pax? . . . sure!--bless you!--buried ruddy hatchet--auld
lang syne--Slavin. . . .  St. Agnes' Eve! . . .  How he sings--!  Oh,
shut up, Yorkey!--Sings, I tell you--!  Hark! . . . that's him singin'
now--Listen! . . .  What? . . . it's Stevenson's 'Requiem'. . . .  Burke!
Burke! . . . the ----'s always singin' that . . . goes--"

And the weak, fretful voice shrilled up in a quavering falsetto--

  "_Under the wide--and--starry sky
  Dig--the grave, and--let me--lie;
  Glad did I--live, and--gladly die,
  And I laid--me down with--a w----_"

The shaky, pitiful tones died away in vague, incoherent mumblings.

Yorke uttered a queer choking sound in his throat, and turned his face
away from the little group.  Slavin, in silent comprehending sympathy,
laid a huge hand on the other's shoulder to steady him.  In customary
British fashion, the O.C. and the Inspector strove to mask their emotions
under an exaggerated grimness of mien, only their eyes betraying their
feelings.  The former, toying with his sweeping, fair moustache in
agitated fashion, gazed drearily around the sick-room till his stern, yet
kindly old eyes finally came to rest upon a framed scriptural quotation
which was hanging on the wall above the head of the cot.

In corpulent, garish, black, red and gold German text the inscription ran:

  _At even, when the sun was set,
  The sick, O Lord, around Thee lay;
  Oh in what divers pains they met!
  Oh in what joy they went away!_

Abstractedly, the old soldier read and re-read the verse till his eyes
ached, and he was forced to lower them and meet the tell-tale ones of
Kilbride.

The Doctor, with a final satisfied scrutiny of his patient's wound, which
he had laid bare, bade the nurse dress it afresh, then, beckoning to the
others, he withdrew from the room, followed by the O.C. and his
subordinates.  The Doctor's first words reassured them in no little
degree.

"Oh, I've good hopes of him," he said.  "He seems to be doing all right.
He'll pull around--that is, unless any unforeseen complications set in.
It's that journey down here yesterday that's upset him.  Absolutely
necessary under the circumstances, of course, but--terribly hard on a man
in his condition.  I think it'll be best for nobody to visit him--for
awhile anyway . . . must be kept as quiet as possible.  Well! let's have
a look at the others!"

The remaining wounded men occupied a large, semi-private ward lower down
the corridor.  Of these last Hardy's case was by far the most serious.
He had been shot through the body; the high-pressure Luger bullet luckily
missing any vital organ.  McCullough had been drilled through the calf of
his left leg, Davis through the arm, and Belt had had the knuckles
stripped from his right hand.  All of them were resting quietly, though
weak from loss of blood and the train journey,

The O.C. and Kilbride remained for a short time in the ward, manifesting
much kindly sympathy for the injured men, then, deeming that perhaps the
party was retarding the nurses' ministrations, the O.C. withdrew,
beckoning his subordinates to follow him.

Slavin and Yorke walked slowly down the hospital steps and climbed into
the Police drag again.  Sloan gathered up his lines and swung around on
his high seat.

"Hullo!" he remarked sleepily.  "Here you are again, eh?  Begun to think
you were both in there for keeps!  Well, did you see him?"

"Yes!" answered Yorke tonelessly, avoiding the teamster's eyes, "We've
seen him.  Home, James!"


Firm, measured footsteps sounded in the hospital corridor and halted with
a jingle of spurs outside the door of room Number Fifty-six.

"Come aboard!" came the clear, boyish voice of its occupant, in response
to a knuckle-tattoo on the panel, and the visitors, Slavin and Yorke,
entered.

Redmond, sitting up in bed, comfortably propped with pillows, threw aside
the magazine he had been reading and greeted the new-comers jovially and
with a light in his eyes which did the hearts of those worthies good to
see.

A month's careful nursing and absolute quiet had transformed their
wounded comrade into a somewhat different being from the delirious
patient they had beheld when last they stood in that room.  Allowing for
a slight emaciation and the inevitable hospital pallor, he appeared to be
well on the road to convalescence.

"Sit at ease!" he said, with a fair semblance of his old grin.  "Smoke up
if you want to, they don't kick about it here.  I've tried it but it
tastes rotten as yet.  Well!  What's doin' in L?"  (He referred to the
Division.)

"Hell, yu' mane," corrected Slavin grimly, as he and Yorke proceeded to
divest themselves of their side-arms and unbutton their tunics.  "Not
much doin' now, but--later, p'raps. . . ."

"Just got back from Supreme Court," explained Yorke.  "Gully! . . .  He's
to be 'bumped off' this day-month. . . ."

There came a long, tense silence.

"G---d!" broke out Yorke suddenly, arousing Redmond out of the deep
reverie into which he had sunk on receipt of the news--"the look on that
Eugene Aram face of his when the jury filed in and threw the book at him!
I can't forget it somehow."

"Well! yeh want tu thin!" remarked Slavin bluntly.  "Quit ut! . . . d'ju
hear? . . .  'Tis no sort av talk, that, for a sick room. . . ."

And hereafter they all avoided the sinister subject.

Presently McCullough came limping in on his crutches, and ere long that
wily individual succeeded with his customary ingenuity in inveigling the
company into a facetious barrack-room argument.  Later they commenced
relating racy stories.

Slavin's deep-set eyes began to twinkle and glow, as he unburdened
himself of a lengthy narrative concerning a furlough he had spent in his
native land many years back, in which Ballymeen Races, a disreputable
"welshing" bookmaker, himself, a jug of whiskey and a blackthorn stick
were all hopelessly mixed in one grand Hibernian tangle.

"Beat ut, he did, over hedge an' bog an' ditch, wid all our money, th'
dhirrty dog.  But I cud run tu, in thim days, an' whin I caught up I
shure did play a tchune on th' nob av um!" concluded the sergeant
thoughtfully.  In pursuance of his daily round of the wards, Dr. Sampson
presently came swinging in amongst them and saluted the party with his
usual breezy bonhomie.  A universal favourite with the members of the
Force his entry was acclaimed with delight.  They promptly bade him sit
down and contribute--à la Boccaccio--to their impromptu Decameron, which
request he (sad to relate) complied with.

Amid the roar of laughter that greeted the Doctor's last bon mot, that
gentleman looked ruefully at his watch and prepared to depart.

"Twenty past twelve!" he ejaculated, "and I've got four more patients to
see yet. . . !  Behold the retarding influences of bad company!"

"Say, Doctor," enquired Yorke, "how's Hardy doing?  Is he bucking up at
all?  He was pretty down in the mouth last time I saw him."

The Doctor's genial countenance clouded slightly.  "Well, no!" he said,
gravely, "he's not doing well at all.  I've been rather worried over him
lately.  The man's relapsed into a curious state of inertia--seems
incapable of being roused.  Organically he's nothing to fear now; I'll
stake my professional reputation on that.  But when a man gets down like
he is now, why, the mind often reacts on the body with serious results.
If he was in a tropical climate he'd snuff out like a candle.  That's all
that's retarding his otherwise certain recovery now--if we could only----"

Here, McCullough, who had been an interested listener broke in.  "Rouse
him, Doctor?" he queried, "you say he wants rousing? . . .  Is that
all? . . .  All right then! . . .  I know him better than you do--I'll
bet you I'll rouse him!" he concluded a trifle brutally.

And he swung off on his crutches and presently levered himself into the
ward where Hardy lay.

In actual bodily recovery the latter's physical condition fully equalled
Redmond's, but the brooding, listless demeanor of the patient confirmed
only too well the Doctor's diagnosis.  Now, sunk in the coma of utter
dejection, Hardy was lying back on his pillows like a man weary of life.

Sometime earlier, in response to his earnest solicitations, he had been
allowed to have his beloved parrot in hospital with him.  All day long
the disreputable-looking bird gabbled away contentedly as it climbed
around in its cage, which had been placed on a small table alongside the
cot.

McCullough's first move was to resort to the never-failing expedient of
arousing the parrot's ire by puffing tobacco-smoke into its cage.
Mechanically the outraged bird responded with a shocking blast of
invective, winking rapidly its white parchment-lidded eyes and swinging
excitedly to and fro on its perch.

Hardy admonished the joker--lethargically, but with a certain degree of
malevolence in his weary tones.

"Aw, chack it, Mac!" he drawled.  "W'y carn't yer let th' bleedin' bird
alone?  Yer know 'e don't like that bein' done t'im.  Jes' 'awk t'im
tellin' yer as much!"

McCullough turned on his crutches and leered awhile upon the speaker with
a sort of mournful triumph, than he lifted up his voice in a very fair
imitation of Hardy's own unmusical wail----

  "Old soldiers never die, never die, never die,
  Old soldiers never die--they simply fade aw-ay."

"I don't think!" he concluded _sotto voce_ to Davis, as that individual,
sitting down on the next cot began preparing his wounded arm for the
ministrations of Sister Marthe who had just entered the ward.

"No use!" McCullough rambled on.  "I tell yu' th' man's as good as 'gone
up.'  Harry. . . .  Well!  I'll have old Kissiwasti when he pegs out
anyway.  I won't half smoke-dry th' old beggar then!  I'll teach him to
swear. . . !"

"Eh! . . . 'Ere, wot abaht it?"

The cockney's voice held no trace of lethargy now.  The sharply-uttered,
vindictive query was matched by the blazing eyes which were regarding the
farrier-corporal with undisguised hostility.

"Wot abaht wot?" mimicked McCullough, though his heart smote him for the
cold-blooded evasion.

"Wot abaht wot you sed abaht me. . . ?"

"Well, wot abaht it. . . ?"

Speechless with rage, for a moment Hardy gazed into the other's
nonchalant mask-like visage, then, with a gesture of maniacal impotence,
he raised his clenched fists high above his head.

Sister Marthe now judged it high time to intervene.  During the enactment
of this little tableau she had stood looking on in mute bewilderment.
Despite her imperfect knowledge of English, and especially the
vernacular, she had a shrewd intuition of what had passed between the two
men.

Seizing McCullough by the arm, despite his protestations of injured
innocence, she gently, but firmly, escorted him out of the ward.

"Vas! vas!--Now you go, M'sieu McCullough! . . . out of ze ward
right-away! . . .  Vat you say--vat you do--I do not know, but you 'ave
excite 'im 'orrible! . . .  Oh, _pardonnez-moi_, Docteur!" she
ejaculated, as she bumped into that gentleman in the corridor.

"Hullo!" said the latter inquiringly, as he remarked the little nurse's
flushed, angry face.  "What's up, Sister Marthe?"

For answer, that irate lady pointed accusingly to McCullough.  That
worthy, his questionable experiment accomplished, was retreating up the
corridor as fast as his crutches could carry him.

"First, Docteur," began the nurse indignantly, "'e blow smoke in ze eye
of ze parrot, then 'e turn roun' to _pauvre_ M'sieu 'Ardy an' 'e
sing--oh, I 'ave not ze English, but 'e _blaguè_ 'im so--

  "_Vieux soldats ne meurent! jamais! jamais! jamais!
  Vieux soldats ne meurent jamais!--ils simplement passent!_"

"An' M'sieu 'Ardy 'e say: 'Vat about?' an' then 'e raise 'is two 'ands è
Ciel--so! an' 'e tell Le Bon Dieu all about it.  Oh, 'ow 'e pray!
Ecoutez!  Docteur!  you can 'ear 'im now! . . ."

And awhile Doctor Sampson listened, a grim smile lurking around the
corners of his firm mouth, as he leaned against the open door of the ward.

"Praying, Sister?" he ejaculated.  "It's the queerest kind of praying
I've ever heard.  But is it him--or is it the parrot?"

Two days later he remarked to the O.C. and Kilbride: "I'm glad to be able
to report a decided improvement in that man Hardy's condition.  His pulse
is stronger, his appetite is increasing and--he's beginning to grouse.
That old ruffian of a farrier-corporal, McCullough, was right, begad!--he
knew the man better than I did.  As a general rule I'm inclined to be
rather sceptical of such drastic experiments, but in certain cases, er--"

"Something of the sort might be beneficial if applied to young Redmond,
too," remarked the O.C., testily.  "He's down in the dumps now; though to
give him his due . . . he tries hard not to show it whenever I happen to
be in the hospital.  Dudley, my Orderly-room sergeant, is leaving next
month--time-expired--so I thought I was conferring a great favour on the
boy by promising him the step-up--good staff appointment--give him a
chance to recuperate thoroughly.  But no!--my young gentleman courteously
declines my munificent offer.  Nothing must serve him but he must go back
to me Irish 'ginthleman' and that d----d dissipated scamp of a Yorke."

"It's the spirit of comradeship," remarked Kilbride quietly.  "If I might
suggest, Sir, . . .  I think it would be better if you do decide to let
him go back there.  They pull well together and do good work, those
three."


"'Ullo, Reddy!" called out Constable Hardy, as he directed his wobbly
steps towards the bench on the hospital balcony where George was seated,
"'ow long 'ave you bin up 'ere?  Th' O.C. an' Kilbride was round jes'
now.  You didn't see 'em, eh?"

"No," answered Redmond listlessly.  And thereupon he relapsed into moody
silence.

"Wy, wot's up?" enquired Hardy presently, scanning the other's downcast
countenance.  "Wot's th' matter wiv you, son? . . . you don't look
'appy! . . ."

"You bet I'm not, either!" burst out George suddenly.  "The Old Man's
offered me Dudley's job, but I don't want a staff job.  I want to go back
to Davidsburg.  Who cares to be stuck around the Post?"

"Me for one!" retorted the old soldier grinning, "Jes' now, anyway.
Listen, son!  Th' Old Man 'e sez to me: ''Ardy!' 'e sez, 'you've bin 'it
pretty bad and I find you deserve a softer class of dewty than goin' back
t' prisoner's escort.  I think I'll recommend you for Provo'-Sorjint, in
charge o' th' Guard-room, w'en you're able t' return t' dewty,' 'e sez."

With an effort Redmond roused himself to the point of congratulating the
Cockney upon his prospective promotion.  He had no desire to act as a wet
blanket on such an auspicious occasion as this, his own troubles
notwithstanding.

"That ain't all," continued Hardy, with a gloating chuckle.  "Th' Old
Man, 'e sez 'Belt's bein' invalided, McCullough's gettin' 'is third
stripe, an' Dyvis is goin' dahn t' th' Corp'ril's Class at Regina, but
that there young Redmond worries me!  I don't know wot t' do abaht 'im,'
'e sez--jes' like that--sorter kind-like--not a bit like th' O.C. o' a
Division torkin' t' a buck private.

"'Beg yer pardon, Sir!' I sez, 'but if you let 'im go back t' Dyvidsburg
I fink 'e'll be quite contented.  Seems like 'e wants t' be wiv Sorjint
Slavin an' Constable Yorke agin.'

"'Fink so?' sez 'e, pullin' 'is oweld moustache, 'I sure do, Sir,' I sez.
'So be it, then!' 'e sez, turnin' t' Kilbride, but th' Inspector 'e sez
nothin':--'e on'y larfs.  An' then they went away."

Redmond, giving vent to a delighted oath, came out of his sulks on the
instant.

"Hardy!" he cried, "you're a gentleman! . . ."

"Nay!" was the other's disclaimer.  "A dranken oweld soweljer, son . . .
that's all."

But Redmond heard him not.  With elbows resting upon the balcony-rail he
was looking beyond the Elbow Bridge, beyond Shagnappi Point--westwards to
Davidsburg, his face registering the supreme content of a man who had
just attained his heart's desire.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LUCK OF THE MOUNTED***


******* This file should be named 15940-8.txt or 15940-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/5/9/4/15940



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
